༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
W1KG16734
2011384165
ImageGroup:
ISBN:
11KG16775
n/a
LCCN:
Title:
the entrance gate for the wise (section III)
Author:
ངག་དབང་སྐལ་ལྡན་
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
Place:
Publisher:
ngag dbang skal ldan
revise version of the author's thesis (Ph. D.--University of Washington, 1985); Includes
bibliographical references (v. 2, p. [465)-504).
Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde;heft 17, 1-2
Wien
arbeitskreis fur tibetische und buddhistische studien, universitat wien
1987
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
In/a
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
n/a
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 1430 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA. Comments: 2/2014



WIENER STUDIEN ZUR TIBETOLOGIE UND BUDDHISMUSKUNDE
HEFT 17.1
DAVID P. JACKSON
THE ENTRANCE GATE FOR THE WISE
(SECTION III)
SA-SKYA PANDITA ON INDIAN AND TIBETAN
TRADITIONS OF PRAMĀŅA AND PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
VOL. I
ARBEITSKREIS FÜR TIBETISCHE UND BUDDHISTISCHE STUDIEN UNIVERSITÄT WIEN
WIEN 1987,



ta WSTB 17,1
Week
ONTROLLER



WIENER STUDIEN
ZUR TIBETOLOGIE UND BUDDHISMUSKUNDE
HERAUSGEGEBEN VON
ERNST STEINKELLNER
HEFT 17,1
WIEN 1987
ARBEITSKREIS FÜR TIBETISCHE UND BUDDHISTISCHE STUDIEN
UNIVERSITAT WIEN



DAVID P. JACKSON
THE ENTRANCE GATE FOR THE WISE
(SECTION )
SA-SKYA PAŅDITA ON INDIAN AND TIBETAN
TRADITIONS OF PRAMĀŅA AND PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
VOL. I
WIEN 1987
ARBEITSKREIS FÜR TIBETISCHE UND BUDDHISTISCHE STUDIEN
UNIVERSITÄT WIEN



© Copyright by
DAVID P. JACKSON
"1987
Preis (Vol. I und II): OS 620,-
zu beziehen von:
Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien
Maria Theresien-Strasse 3/4/26
A - 1090 Wien
Austria



TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vol. 1
page
List of Figures
List of Tables
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Notes . .
.
.
.
.
Sa-skya Pandita's Life, Works, and Tradition
ooooo
17
18
19
Chapter 1: The Life of Sa-skya Pandita: Sources and chronology
Biographical sources . . . . . . . . .
1. Autobiographical Sources . . . . . . . . . .
II. Biographies by His Students . . . .
A. Contemporaneuous Accounts . . . . .
B. Posthumous Accounts . . . . .
C. Lost Biographies by His Students
III. Full-length Biographies by Authors of Later
IV. Genealogical Histories . .
V. Religious Histories . . . . . . .
VI. Political and General Histories .
VII. Commentaries on Sa-pan's Works . .
VIII. Biographies of a Great Lama's Previous
IX. Miscellaneous . . . . . . . .
X. Recent Compositions . . . . .
Chronology of the Main Events in Sa-pan's Life
Early Studies . . . . . .
Auspicious Dreams . . . . . . . . . . . .
Youthful Travels and Studies . . . . . .
Studies with Sakyasri bhadra and the Other Three
Later Studies with Tibetan Teachers
The Death of Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan . . .
Noteworthy Events from His Later Career in Tibet .
Sa-pan's Departure from Tibet and His Death
Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
24
39
Chapter 2: Previous Research on the KhJ and Other Works of Sa-pan.
(1) Mkhas pernams jug pa' i sgo . . . . .
(2) Legs par bahad pa rin po che' i ster . .
(3) Tshad a rigs pa' i gter . . . . .
(4) Thub pa' i dgongs pa rab tugsal ba
(5) Sdom pa gsun gyi rab tu dbye ba . .
(6) Rol noi batan bcos . . . .
(7) Gzhung lugs legs par bahad pa . . .
(8) Bshes pa'i phring yig gi bsdus don
(9) Bu slob rnans la spring ba .



49
49
(10) Gangs can syi sgon chen rnams la gdams pa
(11) Zhen pa bzhi bral syi gdams pa .
(12) Rdo rje theg pa'i rtsa ba dang yan lag gi dem tshig bahad pa.
(13) Skyes bu dam parnams la spring bayi'ge, eto. .
Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
oooo
Chapter 3: The Writings of Sa-pan: Major Works,
Chronology And Transmission
The Chronology of His Works
Early Works . . . . . .
Later Works . . . . .
The Relative Chronology . .
Traditional Classifications of Sa-pan's Greatest Works
The Collection and Transmission of Sa-pan's Works
The Compilation of His Collected Works . . .
Barly Manuscripts . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Inclusion of Sa-pan's Oeuvre into the SKKB
The Earliest Printed Edition . . .
The 1439 Sa-skya Xylograph Edition
The Gong-dkar-ba Edition . . . . .
The Derge Edition . . . . .
Notes . . . . . . . . . .
Chapter 4: Lost, Apocryphal and Doubtful Works
Lost Works . . . . . . . . . . .
Doubtful and Spurious Works . . . .
Unidentified and Bxtrs Titles in the Lists
Works Criticized or Doubted by Previous sa-skya-pa Sohol
Notes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
102
Chapter 5: Sa-pap's Career as soholar of Pramana!
Studies and Translations . . . . . . . .
Studies with Rkyang-dur-ba Mtshur Gzhon-nu-seng-ge
Studies with Sakyasri bhadra and His Disciples
Studies under Sugatasri . . .
Studies with Sakyasri bhadra .
Studies with Samghasri
.
Studies with Danasila
Studies with Brtsegs Dbang-phyug-seng-ge . . .
Sa-pan's Translations of Works on Pramana...
Notes :
. . . . . . . .
105
105
107
108
109
110
111
111
112
114
.
Chapter 6: Sa-pan's Career as a Scholar of Pramana :
His writings and the Lineages He Established.....
Rngog lo-tsa-ba, the Father of Tibetan Pramana Literature
Rngogs Successors and the Badus-pa Literature .... . . .
Sa-pan and His Tshad ma rigs paligter . . . . . . . . .
The Mkhas jug on Pramana . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sa-pan's Influence on the subsequent Study of Pramana in
Sa-skya-pa Teaching Lineages of Prama na
Rigs gter Lineages..
Notes . . .
131
132
133
138
145
147



165
165
Chapter 7: Sa-pan, Rngog and Phywa-pa on the
Interpretation of Dharmakirti
Rngog lo-tsa-ba Blo-dan-shes-rab
Phywa-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge
Sa-akya Pandita Kun-dgal-rgyal-mtshan
Notes
169
171
178
NOtes
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Chapter 8: The Structure and Contents of th
The Contents of the KhJ
Composition . . . .
Exposition . .
Debating . . . .
The steps of a Debate
A Subject Outline of KhJ, Sectio
Notes
. . . . . . . .
191
192
193
195
196
197
200
204
207
207
207
207
215
216
218
Chapter 9: Commentaries on the Mkhas jus
The Earliest Commentators . . . . . . .
Gaer mdog Pan-chen Shakya-nchog-Idan . . .
(A) The Incomplete Commentary . . . . . .
(B) [Mkhas jug dris lan) The Answers to
Glo-bo mkhan-chen's Questions
Glo-bo mkhan-chen Bsod-nams-lhun-grub .
Mkhan-chen Ngag-dbang-chos-grags .
Conclusion . . . . . .
Notes . . . .
Chapter 10: The Critical Edition: Sources and Method
A. The Texts . . . . . . . . .
B: The Bhutanese Manuscript . . .
D: The Derse Edition . . . . . . .
G: The Globo Golden Manuscript . . .
C: The KhJ Commentary of Glo-bo mkhan-chen (KhJNSh
T. G. Dhongthog Rinpoche, New Delhi, 196
Beijing 1991 . . . . .
Rajpur (Dehra Dun), 1983
B. Method of Editing . . . . . .
Orthography and Punctuation
Versification . . . .
The Typeset Text and the Annotati
Notes . . . . . . . . . .
229
229
229
232
236
238
238
238
239
239
240
241
242
243
The Mkhas
Text .
jug, Section III ..
. . . . . . . . . .
249
251
.



Vol. II
The Mkhas jug. Section III
Variant Readings . . . .
Translation . .
. .
1. The Preparation . . . . .
II. The Actual Practice of Debating)
111. The Conclusion .
Notes . . . .
301
323
323
330
364
368
Abbreviations
463
Bibliography . . . .
A. Works of Modern Scholarship
B. Works in Tibetan Language .
.
.
.
.
465
465
487
.
.
505
521
Appendixes . . . . . . . . .
Appendix A: The Writings of Sa-pan Listed in
Ngor-chen's Thob yig rgya mtsho . . . . .
Appendix B: The Collected Works of Sa-pan as Listed in
the Thob yig of the Fifth Dalai Lama . . . .
Appendix C: Index to One Volume of an old Manuscript
of Sa-pan's Works . . . . . . . . . . .
Appendix D: Fragments of a Golden Manuscript of Sa-pans Works
from Lo Mustang (Glo-bo Smon-thang) . . .
Appendix E: The works of Sa-pan Listed by Rin-apungs pa
in His Biography of Sa-pan . . . . . . . . . .
Appendix F: The Works of Sa-pan Listed by A-mes-zhabs
in His Saskya dung rabe chen mo
Appendix G: The Works of Sa-pan Listed or Quoted in His Biographie
by Lho-pa kun-mkhyen and Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal
Appendix H: Works on the Lan-'bras Attributed to Sa-pan which
are Listed in the Gsan yig of the Fifth Dalai Lama
Appendix I: Outline of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's
Commentary on the KhJ . . .
Appendix J: Index of the Collected Works of Glo-bo mkhan-chen,
Gelung Manuscript . . . .
Appendix K: Index of the Collected Works of Glo-bo mkhan-chen,
Mönthang Manuscript . . . . . . . . . . .
Appendix L: A List of Sa-pan's Works Found in the
KhJNS Commentary of Glo-bo mkhan-chen . . .
Appendix M: A List of Sa-pan's Works Found in Gong-dkar
Phrin-las-nam-rgyal's Record of Teachings Received
Appendix N: The Works of Sa-pan listed in the Record of
Teachings Received of Dkon-mehog-lhun-grub .
Appendix O: The Contents of One Volume from a Sa-skya
Manuscript of Sa-pan's Collected Works . . . . . . .
568
572
575



LIST OF FIGURES
page
1. The Relations of Twenty-two of Sa-pan's Works According to
Internal Citations and References (with Conjectural
Chronology) .................
2.
The Steps of a Debate...
198



LIST OF TABLES
page
fe
1. The Main Accessible Accounts of Sa-skya Pandita's
Listed in Chronological Order...
2. A Chronological Chart of the Main Events in Sa-pan's Life.
3. Eleven Lists of Sa-pan's Works .



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my thanks first of all to my revered Tibetan
teachers who gave me the benefit of their unrivalled understanding of Sa-akya
Pandita's works, the result of their many years of scholarship both in the semi-
naries of Tibet and, since 1959, in India or abroad. In particular, I ove a great
debt of gratitude to the Venerable Khenpo Appey (Mkhan-po A-pad Yon-tan-bzang-po),
principal of the Sakya College, Rajpur, for his painstaking explanations of se-
pap's Mkhas jug and Thub pa'i dsongs gsal, and for his generous hospitality and
kindness. I must also record here my special thanks and gratitude to the Vener-
able Dezhung Rinpoche (Sde-gzhung sprul-sku Kun-dga'-batan-pa'i-royal-mtshan) and
the Venerable Chogay Trichen Rinpoche (Bco-brgyad khri-chen Thub-bstan-legs-bahad-
rgya-mtsho).
The present study is a revision of the disseration I defended at the
University of Washington in April of 1985. I am deeply indebted to my teacher
Professor D. Seyfort Ruegg for encouraging ay interest in this field and for his
unflagging support and assistance. I am also truly thankful to the reading com-
mittee members, Professors T. Ellingson, Chr. Lindtner, K. Potter and R. Solomon,
for their valuable comments and criticisms.
Most of the research and much of the writing up of the present study was
done in Japan and India, and I am particularly grateful to Professor K. Mimaki and
Mr. E. C. Smith for their friendships which made my work in those countries In-
measurably more pleasant and fruitful. I would also like to record my thanks to
the Venerable Migmar Tsering for his very useful comments on the translation of
KHJ III, and to Mr. Tashi Tsering for his help on several literary and historical
problems. In addition, I am indebted to the American Institute of Indian Studies
for the research fellowship which made possible my studies in India from the fall
of 1981 to the spring of 1983 and to Professor S. Sengupta of the Department of
Buddhist Studies at Delhi University, my research supervisor during that period.
While I was revising this study for publication, several friends and col-
leagues helped me clarify a number of points through their comments and sugges-
tions, or they supplied additional references or identifications of sources. Here
I would like to acknowledge in a small way ay considerable debt to them by sen-
tioning their names: Dr. L. van der Kuijp, Prof. N. Aramaki, Mr. S. Onoda, Mr. S.
Matsumoto, Dr. H. Eimer, Dr. T. Much, and Mr. John Tate.



.
.
的是一个可
中文
可以的
。
可是,
一中
一下,
是一
以上,
三立新的一
下
一步
2
0110元
,
| 10
14 一月
中
中一至中市
二中学
一中
:
--
-
--
-



Learn everything: you will
find nothing superfluous; a
narrow education displeases.
--Hugh of St. Victor!
Disputation is the wall in
this building of study, for
nothing is fully understood
or faithfully preached if it
is not first chewed by the
tooth of disputation.
---Peter the Chanter
Some
INTRODUCTION
The intellectual history of traditional Tibet is largely the story of how
the Tibetans translated, penetrated, assimilated, and finally refined and worked
into elaborate scholastic systems the great religious, philosophical, and other
technical writings of Buddhist India. These were tremendous tasks, though they
formed just a part of the massive expansion of Indian Buddhist thought in Asia
during the first and early second millenia c. E. The job of translation alone
consumed the best efforts of many of Tibet's greatest scholars from the 8th to
12th centuries, and the two immense Tibetan canonical collections--the Kanjur and
Tanjur--are eloquent witnesses to the zeal and success of these early Tibetan
scholars.
One of the most influential figures in the transmission of Indian Buddhist
religion and learning to Tibet was Sa-skya Pandita Kun-dga'-rgyal-mtshan (Sa-pan)
(1182-1251), a savant who is counted among the very greatest Tibetan scholars of
all time. As a young man he learned Sanskrit and executed a number of transla-
tions, but by his time the work of translating the basic religious scriptures and
philosophical treatises was nearly finished. Therefore his main tasks were to
consolidate the doctrinal and philosophical advances of his predecessors and to
enrich further the scholarly and literary resources of Tibetan Buddhism. Through
his doctrinal treatises Sa-pap contributed in an important way to the continuing
penetration and systematie interpretation of Indian Buddhist philosophy and
doctrine. But he also made great contributions indirectly through his efforts at
introducing into Tibet the tools and methods of advanced dialectical and literary



scholarship. He reestablished in Tibet the full Pranana (logico-epistemological)
tradition of Dharmakirti, including the Pramāpavarttika. He also expanded the
possibilities of Tibetan literature by adapting and introducing suitable aspects
of the Sanskrit literary arts. In these vays not only did he singlehandedly raise
the standards of Tibetan scholarship in general, but he also bestowed on his
countrymen the tools by which future generations could carry forward that work.
The subject of the present study is Sa-skya Pandita's treatise the Michas pa
rams jus pa'i 589 (KhJ), which was one of his main means for introducing the
methods of traditional Indian Buddhist scholarship into Tibet and thus putting
Tibetan scholarship on a sound methodological footing. This work, whose title
could be translated "The Entrance Gate for the Wise," was one of Sa-pan's five
major works (the other four being his Tshad ma rigspali stor. Sdom sun rab dbye,
Lege bahad, and Thub pa'i dgongs gsal). Its subject matter was the three main
activities of the traditional scholar: composition, exposition, and debate. Each
of these three activities reflected one of the main thrusts of his own career.
His teaching of the methods of composition was the outgrowth of his own pioneering
studies of Sanskrit grammar and the Sanskrit literary arts such as poetics, me-
trics, and lexicography. His explanation of the principles of debate was the
fruit of his intense study of the Pramana tradition of Dharmakirti. And his
teaching of the principles of correct exposition and interpretation was linked to
his deep involvement in propagating the Buddhist doctrine through discriminating
the Buddhist traditions of authentic Indian origins from among the numerous Tibe-
tan traditions current in his day.
Sa-pan's Inmediate motive for explaining these topics was either to filla
real gap in current knowledge (as in the case of grammar and poetics) or to
rectify already established traditions (as in the case of some aspects of exposi-
tion and debate)." In his own introduction to the KhJ he states that he was
trying to benefit those Tibetans who, though claiming to be learned, vere in fact
ignorant of many aspects of Indian and Buddhist scholarship.
There was also a deeper, religious motive for the work. By teaching the
methods of scholarship. Sa-pan hoped to lead others ultimately to enlightened
visdon, the highest goal of Buddhist practice. Near the end of the treatise he
characterized his work as a "gate by which persons of bright intelligence enter
the city of the Great Liberation."' And in one of the concluding verses (KhJ
III 73), he states that he opened the "entrances for the vise" who uphold tradi-
tions of scholarship "so that the doctrine of the Sage (muni) will increase in all
directions and may long remain in the world." He therefore hoped ultimately to
propagate the Buddhist doctrine and to encourage the attainment of a wisdom
which was not a merely intellectual understanding, but which was a liberating



realization,
Thus when he called his treatise an "entrance" or "entry gate" for pa't
880) " for "scholars" or "the vise" (skhas pa rhans), he meant it to be a guide
that was conducive to the realization of the highest religious goal. In his
Introduction (KhJ I 4-5) he furthermore specifies just what he means by "wise
person" (akhas pa) and what the objects of such a person's knowledge should be:
What is a vise person? He is held to be one who understands, just as
they are the real facts about knowable things."
In his autocomentary, Sa-pan indicates that ideal wisdom is nothing short of
omniscience:
He is one who knows without error
What is a "wise person"?
objects of knowledge. 12
The Tibetan word mkhas pa "wise"), however, also has a narrower meaning, viz.
"expertise" or "learnedness" in a particular field. Sa-pan himself specifies this
in the next lines (I 4cd):
One who knows the subject of a particular study is also wise in
that 13
And in the autocommentary:
Moreover, a person who knows a particular thing that he studied also
gains the designation "one who is learned in just that."
Sa-pan next explains the proper subjects for the wise man's study (I 5):
The objects (of learning) are said to be grammar, dialectics,
healing, and the "outer" and "inner" sciences.
Grammar is the study of] words, dialectics is logico-
epistemology. the "outer" science consists of manual arts and tech-
niques, the "inner" science is the doctrine of the religious scrip-
tures, and the science of healing is medicine.
Thus the wise or truly learned man had to be a comprehensive, encyclopedic
scholar, a master of all theoretical and practical subjects. This ideal lay at



the heart of the treatise, and Sa-pan's immediate motive for composing the work
vas to help his fellow men attain it.
Sa-pap could not of course teach the contents of each and every branch of
learning within a single treatise. Instead, in the KhJ he taught the methods and
principles which were presupposed by true scholarship in any field. Above all,
the wise man had to be able to communicate accurately his knowledge to others, and
the three main means for that were composition, exposition, and discussion or
debate. These three then were the "entrances" through which all who desired
proficiency in scholarship had to pass. This treatise was accordingly divided
into three parts, and in each part Sa-paņ taught one of the three "entrances" for
the vise.
Sa-pan was uniquely qualified among the Tibetans of his time to teach the
methods of Indian scholarship and the ways of Buddhist wisdom. He had himself
mastered all the subjects that his Tibetan teachers could teach, and he had also
studied very assiduously at the feet of four great Indian Buddhist scholars. He
had become, in fact, the first Tibetan who was acknowledged to be a papdita, &
title reserved in Indian Buddhist scholasticism for a scholar who had mastered all
five major fields of knowledge." The KhJ in particular was one of the pioneering
treatises that established his reputation as a popdita.
Sa-pap was also one of the first Tibetan religious teachers to have been
widely honored by later generations with the eulogistic appellation "Lord of
Dharma" (chos kyk rte dharmasvänin). This title shows that in addition to his
specifically, scholarly attainments, he was recognized to be one of the very great-
est upholders of the Buddhist teachings in his day. His eminence as a spiritual
teacher was founded upon a careful discerament of and adherence to genuine Indian
Buddhist tradition. He was a resolute traditionalist, acknowledging as genuine
only those works that he was satisfied could be ascertained as being the word of
the Buddha or the explanations of the Buddha's great followers. Sa-pan arti-
culated this basic principle in the KhJ and elsewhere:
One must study and teach that doctrine which the Buddha proclaimed,
which has come down through a succession of learned masters, which was
realized by the adepts (siddha) through meditation, which was ex-
pounded by learned men (papdita), which was translated from Sanskrit
to Tibetan) by translators, and which is widely recognized by all
Indian and Tibetan learned adherents of the scriptural traditions. If
[the doctrine that one teaches) is not like that, the learned masters
of India vill deride it, and they vill feel repelled, saying, "The
Buddha taught no such doctrine. It harms the [Buddhist) Doctrine to



teach a doctrine of one's own fabrication."
Sa-pan also enunciated in the Khu the principle that doctrinal error may be
refuted because the Doctrine may be harmed if error is allowed to
proliferate, just as the desired crops in a field will suffer if veeds are allowed
to spread unchecked. He carried this principle into practice in some of his
treatises, and this earned him no small notoriety as a polemicist.“
of the three main sections of the KhJ-composition, exposition, and
debate--in the following study I have concentrated on the third section, that on
debate, and have presented the edited text and an annotated translation of this
section below. His treatment of debating is important because debating remains a
typical and essential part of Tibetan scholasticism, though the Indian Buddhist
origins of that tradition and its early development in Tibet have only now begun
to be investigated. For Sa-pan, "debate" meant a formal philosophical discussion
between two scholars who maintained differing tenets and attempted to express them
in sound logical form and to defend them from the criticisms of the opponent. In
later Indian Buddhise, debate belonged basically to the branch of Pramāņa which
dealt with "inference for the sake of others" (Azhan don rtes dpag pararthanu-
mana). He accordingly discussed many points of debating proper included within
that topic, such as how to start and conclude, what constitutes victory or defeat,
and the identities of the participants. But Sa-pap's treatment was not narrowly
restricted, for he also dealt with such diverse peripheral questions as the place
of scripture and tenets in debate, whether a debator must maintain tenets or a
thesis, how to resolve apparent contradictions of scripture, and what constitutes
reasoning that is objectively validated.
In India, formal debates held before an assembly of witnesses were a sort
of intellectual duel. A loss in debate meant not only a great loss of prestige,
but it also commonly entailed the repudiation of one's original doctrine and the
forced adoption of the opponent's creed. Given such high stakes, some Indian
debators (e.g. some Naiyāyikas) held that it was permissible to use any means-
fair or foul-to gain victory and to defend one's school. The Buddhist tradition
following Dharmakirti (and upheld by Sa-pan) insisted to the contrary that winning
or losing was entirely dependent on the soundness of the two opponents' statements
of proof and refutation. Thus for this tradition, tricks and other dishonest
means had no place at all in a genuine debate. A real debate was a confrontation
between two scholars who held different tenets and attempted to defend them sin-
cerely and honestly.
In the Tibetan seminaries of Sa-pan's time, however, debating and dia-
lectics were mainly an academic exercise. In the schools descending from the



traditions of Rngog lo-tsa-ba Blo-ldan-shes-rab and Phywa-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge,
dialectics was one of the core subjects that every student had to study and
master. A number of peculiarly Tibetan ideas and practices became incorporated
into the pedagogic debates of the seminaries, and Sa-pap, who had received some
early training in these lineages, later devoted much effort to attempts at cor-
recting them. Much of the debate section of the khJ must be understood as being
directed against these earlier Tibetan traditions.
For Tibetan scholars from the 12th century on, dialectics and its mother
discipline Pramana were extremely important subjects. This was because in Tibetan
seminaries Pramana had become the ideal and fundamental intellectual discipline:
it was the standard against which all other scholarly endeavors were measured and
evaluated. Pramana shaped the thought of Tibetan scholastic writers, and it
determined how they dealt with other subjects, something like Aristotelian logic
did for medieval Buropean scholastics. For their actual dialectic practice,
however, Tibetan scholars were most influenced not by the Pranana of Dharmakirti,
but by the Indigenous introductory handbooks from which they had learned the
habits of logical argumentation in their youth. These Tibetan introductory hand-
books, the Bedus grva texts, by and large represented the earlier tradition of
Tibetan dialectics founded by Phywa-pa, and they were the targets of Sa-pan's
criticisms not only in the thJ but also in his great treatise on Pramapa, the
Tshad ma rigs pali ster (RT).
The present study describes for the first time some of Sa-pan's contribu-
tions to the development of dialectics and Pramana in Tibet. It also attempts to
al context of his contributions and to trace some of the
related doctrinal or philosophical issues. The study has three main sections, the
first of which consists of ten introductory chapters. Chapter 1 gives a chrono-
logical sketch of Sa-pap's life and lists the sources upon which biographical
studies must be based. Chapter 2 reviews the previous modern research on the KhJ
and the other works of Sa-pan: Chapters 3 and 4 survey the writings of Sa-pan and
describe a number of lost or apocryphal writings. Chapters 5 and 6 describe sa-
pan's career as a scholar of Pramāņa, detailing his studies, translations and
writings on this subject, and also tracing some of the Pramana lineages that he
founded. Chapter 7 investigates the question of how Sa-pap and the earlier scho-
lars Rngog lo-tsa-ha Blo-Idan-shes-rab and Phywa-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge classified
and interpreted the thought of Dharmakirti. Chapter 8 describes the content and
structure of the KhJ. Chapter 9 surveys the known commentarial writings on this
treatise. Chapter 10 completes this first main section, describing the textual
sources for the critical edition. The second main section of this study consists
of the edited text and annotated translation of KhJ part III. The third and final



main section includes the bibliography and several appendixes.
Sa-pap's KhJ or "Entrance for the Wise" is not an easy gateway to pass
through. The work apparently never became a part of ordinary monastic curri-
culums, probably precisely because its contents were judged too specialized and
difficult. Even in Sa-pan's time there were seemingly only a very few students
who seriously took up the study of its subject matter. Indeed, one of Sa-pan's
basic motiveg--the teaching of wisdom to others-was something that was very
difficult to be realized. It has been said that true scholarship cannot be
communicated, and surely this can also be said of the wisdom of the sage.
But Sa-paņ did succeed in influencing those who mattered most: the greatest Tibe-
tan scholars of subsequent generations. Though they occasionally criticized the
KhJ on points of detail, later Tibetan savants also recognized the KhJ as a great
landmark in their literary and intellectual history, and as a never-superseded
guide to the methods of scholarship. As such, it continues to be studied today by
numerous scholars of Tibetan nationality, both in Tibet and abroad. 20
The Kh was thus a fundamental work in the development and transmission of
many Tibetan literary and scholarly traditions. As a description of the prin-
ciples that guided the thought of Tibet's greatest scholars and writers, it is
also an extremely useful introduction and guide for foreign students of Tibetan
Buddhist literature. This was the initial reason I decided some years ago to
begin studying it, and for my own education I could not have made a better choice.
When I began, however, I did not suspect that in addition to the basic diffi-
culties of its subject matter, it also contained quite a few textual and doctrinal
conundrus, several of which have for centuries baffled even some of the greatest
savants of the tradition. The present study records my findings and solutions to
date, but I do not pretend to have solved every problem in it, not even in part
III which I studied most intensively.
Tibetan Buddhist studies have made considerable progress in the last two
decades, mainly because of the greater accessibility of both the texts and the
living tradition. Given Sa-pap's crucial importance, it is not surprising that
his works too have been attracting increasingly more attention and interest. The
speed of further progress in doctrinal and philosophical studies, however, will
depend on the availability of a sound textual and historical basis. More tho-
roughgoing and penetrating analyses of Sa-pan's ideas can only be safely founded
upon careful critical editions of all his seminal classics and upon a more
detailed knowledge of the ideas of his predecessors and opponents. But until
those needs are met, I hope that the present study will be found useful as an



"entrance gate" of sorts--a small portal into the vast intellectual dominions of
one of Tibet's greatest geniuses.
D. P.
J.
Kyoto
January, 1985
New Delhi
December, 1986



Notes
Quoted from B.
Hugh of St. Victor, Didascalicon : de Studio Legendi.
Smalley (1978), p. 86.
"Peter the Chanter, Verbum Abbreviatur. Quoted from B. Smalley (1978), p.
208.
See also L. Renou (1964), p. 128.
"Many of Sa-pap's contributions in the KhJ had no precedents in Tibet. See
for instance Shakya-mchog-ldan, Mkhas pa, pp. 119.4-120.7.
PKJ (D), p. 81.3.4-6 thn 164a.4-6): mkhas su khas "che ba 'sa'
zhig.... gangs can gyi khrod 'di na legs par ma [164b) sbyangs pa'i skye bo
phal cher. 'khrul par mthong nas de la phan pa'l don du mkhas pa Liu pali sgo
01 bshad do//. Cf. Shikya-mchog-Idan, Mkhas pa, p. 69.4: bye brag tu bod 'dir
batan bcos rtson pa'i sgo dod byung ba'i tshe na rtsom 'chad rtsod po sun char/
phage yuldusrags padang shas cher mthun pa syid bya dos pa'i yan las tu
mkhas pa ug pali sgo zhes bya ba'1 batan bcos 'di mdzad do and Shakya-mchog-
Idan, Mkhas ug dris lan, p. 119.6: gangs can svi ljongs "dir batan bcos 'di ma
byon pa'i gong rol tu rtson pa dang/ chad pa dang/ rtsod pa'i tahul gsun legs par
mi 'chad pas/ bstan bcos dis ni mkhas pa'i bye bassum la 11 ltar yg pali
tahul Rzhung 11 Ita ba bahin du 'chad pa ni batan bcos 'di'i dgos palo/.
"This religious motive could be said to be the underlying motive or "no-
tive of the motive" (dgos pa'i dgos pa) of the Khy. This was one of four topics
by which Tibetan and Indian Buddhist scholiasts commonly introduced and explained
the purpose of the text which they were about to expound. In the Khu (I 12,
autocommentary, [D] p. 83.1.5; tha 1678.5 = 5a.5) Sa-pap lists these four :
(1) the subject matter (br jod bya)
(2) motive (dgos pa)
(3) motive of the motive (dgos pa' dgos pa)
(4) connection between the above three) ('brel pa)
See also his Byis pap. 118.2.6 (tha 238,6 - 140.6). Cf. the four similar
Introductory topics mentioned by Conrad of Hissau (d. ca. 1150), as described by
A. Piltz (1981), p. 85. Cf. also the four anubandhas or "requisites" discussed at
the beginning of the exposition of Indian śāstras as described by G. S. Huparikar



(1949), p. 121f:
(1) the competency of the student to understand a work
(2) the subject matter
(3) connection between the subject matter and the work to be studied
(4) the motive of inducement to enter into the study
KUJ (P), p. 111.3.3 (tha 224.3 - 621.3): ble gros 8891 ball akye borrams
thar pa chen po'i grong khyer du tug pa'i sgo.
KAJ III 73
Sa-pay considered religious or moral learning to have value only insofar
as one put it into practice. As he said in one of his famous aphorisms (LSh 448):
If learned people while very easily understanding all aphoristic
sayings do not practice their meanings, what use is it even if they
know the "sciences" (lit.: treatises, sästra)?
Cf. J. Bosson (1969), p. 294.
Sometimes the word jug pa (Skt. avatara) in a title can be understood as
"introduction." See A. K. Warder (1971), p. 200. C. the similar Japanese
nyumon, which is used in book titles for "Primer of ..." or "Elementary ...."
The image of an "entrance gate" or "portal" was already employed before
Sa-pan by his uncle Bsod-nams-rtse-mo in the latter's major treatise the Chos lo
Mius RA1 sgo. Sa-pan himself also referred to the "three entrances of the
vise" (akhas pernams tur pa'i sgo sum) in one of his earlier works, a commenta-
ryon Baod-nams-rtse-no's Byis po bde blag tutup. See Sa-pap, Byis pa, P.
118.3.1 (tha 2385.1 = 14b.1). See also ibid., p. 122.3.5 (tha 2466.5 - 226.5):
mkhas pernams jug pa't sgo. Cf. Sa-pap's Tshig gi gter, p. 131.4.5 (tha 265b.5
- 136,5) where he speaks of the fields of knowledge as "akchas pa trama ug pali
yan lag."
“Khở (D), P. 82,1.2 (tha 165a.2 = 3a.2):
mkhas gang shes bya'1 de kho nal/
11 behin rroga par yin par "dod//
*Ibid: mkhas pa zhes bya ba gang yin ce na/ shes bya thana cad phyin ci
na log par shes pa vin la/. cf. Sa-pap's Snye mo sgon chen si dris lan, P.
418.3.5 (na 2481,5): delang pandita bya ba phyi, nang l shes bya'. gnas la mkhas
pa la zer.



SKIJ (D), p. 82.1.2 (tha 1650.2 - 3a.2):
bye brag abyangs pa't don shes pa//
de yang de la michas pa yin//.
Ibid.: Rzhan yang bye brag sang bslabs pa shes pa de lalang de nyid la
mkhas pa zhes bya bali ming thob bol.
Ibid., line 3:
RO
de yul brda sprod rtog ge dang//
880 ba phyi nang rig ces sungs/
brda sprod pa sgra dang/ rtog ge tshad a dang/ phyi rol rig pa bzo dang
rig pa lung kichos dang/ gso baris pa sman dpyad do//.
nang
"Indeed, according to Shakya-achog-ldan's commentary, those three are the
activities which engage the objects to be learned and which create mastery or
proficiency in them. Shakya-achog-ldan, Mkhas pa, p. 102.5: batan bcos 111 Lus
rnam par bzhag pa lo mkhas par bya ba'i yul bden pa gayie shes tshul dang/mkhas
par bred pa'i yul can rtson 'chad rtsod gsum la mkhas dgos par bstan pa ate/.
Won the title pandita and its threefold classification into (1) pandita
chen po or michas pa mkhas pe or mkhas pa'i rab, (2) michas pa'i barn, and (3)
mkhas pa' chung ngu, see Shakya-mchog-ldan, Mkhas pa, pp. 101.5. According to
modern usage, a pandita is one who knows the five major fields of knowledge,
though one may become a "lesser pandita" (pandita chung ngu by mastering just the
five lesser fields of knowledge. The five lesser fields are:
(1) sgra (Sanskrit grammar)
(2) snyan ngas (poetics)
(3) sdeb sbyor (metrics)
(4) zlos gar (drama)
(5) ning i mngon br jod (lexicon or synonyny)
To become a "great pandita" (pandita chen po), one has to master all ten fields of
knowledge. But cf. R. K. Mookerji (1969), p. 569, where the title papdita is said
to have been sometimes reserved for the head of a Buddhist "university" in India,
and sometimes applied to all "graduates." Cf. also D. D. Kosambi and v. v.
Gokhale eds. (1957), p. xxxvi:
"These viharas (Vikramabila, Uddandapuri, and Jagaddala) gave the title
papdita (of the institute in question) by royal command.... To judge from
survivals in Tibet, the official title pandita must have involved long study
leading to a formal examination in the Buddhist scriptures by the leading scholars



of the particular Vihara; the successful candidate would, presumably, be granted a
royal stipend along with the title, or Taranatha's references have no meaning."
Sa-pap was the first Tibetan who studied the five lesser fields of know-
ledge intensively. See for example Shakya-mchog-ldan, Mkhas pa, D. 69.3: khaba
can dir de las sngon du ma byon pa'i rig gnas Inga mkhyen pa zhes. See also
Shakya-mchog-ldan, Chos kyi 'khor, P. 466.1
It is not clear when Sa-pan first acquired the title "Pandita." He is said
in one source to have been so called first by Sakyatri and the latter's retinue
after Sa-pap demonstrated his knowledge of Sanskrit at the time of their first
meeting (in 1204). See the account of Co-rams-pa as quoted by L. van der Kuijp
(1983), p. 100 and note 290.
Sa-pap seems in fact to have claimed the title for himself when stilla
young scholar. In the colophon to his Rol mo'i batan bcos written perhaps in 1203
or 1204 (but in any case before 1209), he styles himself "a pandita who has
most of the commonly recognised fields of knowledge the object of his cognition,
who although youthful in years possesses an old [i.e. mature] intellect." See his
Rol mo'i, p. 80.2.5 (tha 1619,5 -74.5): shes bya'i. gnas yongas grase, pa phal mo
che la blos yul du byas pali papdita lo gzhon yang blo gros rgan pa shâkya'i dge
banyen kun dga' rgyal mtshan gyis ....
An earlier teacher with the title papdita is mentioned in the biography of
'Bri-gung 'Jig-rten-mgon-po (1143-1217). He was one Mgo-pa Pandita, who flou-
rished in the 1160s. See khetsun Sangpo, vol. 9, p. 206.
The KhJ demonstrated his knowledge of Sanskrit poetics, which he did not
begin to study in earnest until about 1205. His knowledge of metrics and lexico-
graphy were shown by his Sdeb abyor sna tshops me tog gi chun po and Tshig gi
gter, respectively.
"Sa-pap commonly used the title chos de when referring to his uncle
Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan. For the later Sa-skya-pa tradition, however, the title
especially in the form chos riepa--became identified almost exclusively with Sa-
pan. Cf. Shakya-mchog-Idan, Chos kyi "khor, p. 467.3: chos kyi rje zhes bya ba'i
mtahan yang sngon bod du ma grags, pa 'di pas thob palo/.
UKIJ II 3, autocommentary, (D) p. 94.4.6 (tha 1901.6 = 286.6): mnyan bya'i
chos kyang sangs rgyas kyis gaungs/ mkhas pa las brgyud/ grub thob kyis [191a)
bogoms/ papditas bahad lo tsa bas ba yur/ chya gar dang bod kyi. sde snod dzin
pa mchas pa thams cad la lege par srags pa'i chos la nyan bahad byed deos/ de Ita
ma yin na saya gar ayi mkhas pa rnams kyis brnyas par 'gyur te sangs rayas kyis



de Itabu's chos saunga pa med rang bzo'i chos bahad pa batan pala gnod ces
khrel bar 'gyur ro//.
See also the Thus, p. 3.3.2 (tha 7a.2). Cf. the similar statement in
Sgra-tshad-pa's biography of Bu-ston, p. 13b.5. Sa-pap in his Skyes, bu dam pa, P.
332.4.2 (na 74a.2 : 58.2), credits Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan with teaching him the
necessity of conforming with what the Buddha taught.
21kJ III 41, autocommentary.
"He was not by any means the first Tibetan to criticize his countrymen
through religious polemics. The great translator Rin-chen-bzang-po (958-1055) was
one of several early Tibetans who wrote refutations of erroneous religious prac-
tices, as Sa-pap mentions near the end of his Sdom geum rab dbye. See also the
early refutations of erroneous Tantric practices listed by Bu-ston near the end of
the canonical catalogue section of his Chos 'byung (S. Nishioka (1983), p. 118,
nos. 3061, 3064). One important aspect of Sa-pap's critical doctrinal studies was
his exclusion of apocryphal Sūtras and Tantras from those accepted ag genuine by
the wider Indo-Tibetan tradition. On this see for instance Lho-pa, p. 475.3; Bu-
ston's Chos 'byung, catalogue section (s. Nishioka (1980), p. 78); and Glo-bo
mkhan-chen, KhJnSh, p. 106b.
E. Gene Smith (1969b), p. 63, asserts that another target of Sa-pap's
criticisms was the Rnying-na-pa: "Sa-pan (and Chag-lo] (like 'Gos Khug-pa Lhas-
btsas, "Bri-gung-pa Dpal-'dzin, and Bu-ston) were 'reformers' who attacked the
Rnying-ma-pa on the grounds that Sanskrit originals could not be found, and the
tantras differed in form and phraseology from the 'new' tantras." Sa-pap's
attitude toward the Rnying-ma-pa, and the extent to which he participated in
Rnying-ma-pa practices, requires further investigation.
23KJ III 730:
bdag gis 'bad kyang gzhan gyis "dzin pa nyung//.
29. M. Forster (1962), p. 28: "Genuine scholarship is one of the highest
successes which our race can achieve. No one is more triumphant than the man who
chooses & worthy subject and masters all its facts and the leading facts of the
subjects neighboring. . ..If his conclusions could be as valuable to us as
they are to himself he would long ago have civilized the human race. As you know,
he has failed. True scholarship is incommunicable, true scholars rare."



4°c. Sa-pap's statement in KhJ I 34 (D p. 84.3.4 [61a.4]) and KhJ III 37
autocommentary that ultimate truth is not "knovable," which implies that it is
also not transmittable. See also below, KhJ III translation, note 95.
The third section of the KhJ has recently been included within the
compulsory curriculum of the Sa-skya-pa students at the Central Institute of
Higher Tbetan Studies, Sarnath, following the recommendations of a committee of
leading Sa-skya-pa scholars in India.
The rationale for the study of such works as the KhJ has been aptly
expressed by G. Makdisi (1981), P. xiii: "The form and content of intellectual
works are intelligible in the extent to which the methods of instruction, study
and composition are understood in their essential details."



Chapter 1
THE LIFE OF SA-SKYA PANDITA:
SOURCES AND CHRONOLOGY
Because Sa-pan was universally acknowledged as one of the key figures in
the religious, political and scholarly history of Tibet, accounts of his life or
mentions of his accomplishments are found in many places within Tibetan 11tera-
ture. Brief accounts can be located in the standard political and religious
histories, as well as in commentaries on his writings and in various other works.
There also exist a number of independent full-length biographies that were written
by his disciples or by later followers of the tradition. Indeed, probably no
other Tibetan of the 13th century is the subject of so much biographical wri
Yet when one reads these accounts, the first thing that strikes one is the rela-
tive dearth of hard dates and personal facts. The eulogistic element predominates
in many places, and so far nobody has gone through these sources with the aim of
critically discerning the historical kernel by removing the eulogistic and some-
times legendary chaff. Here is not the place to attempt that in any detail. It
may, however, be worthwhile as part of an introduction to his works to list at
least the main sources on his life and to extract from the most important of them
a brief outline of his career.
Biographical Sources
What follows is an enumeration of the main biographical sources, grouped
according to their nature as witnesses, i.e. according to whether they are auto-
biographical or biographical, or whether primary or secondary. In addition, the
secondary sources are divided into different groups according to the type of
literature to which they belong.
I. Autobiographical Sources
The sources that must be given the most weight in any study of his life are
those that date from his lifetime, and of course a very great importance must be
assigned to those works which issued from his own pen. Sa-pan did not compose an
autobiography as such. But he did sometimes record details of his early studies



and development, or set dows his thoughts and feelings in an autobiographical
vein. For instance, he gives in the following works details about his studies:
(1) Nga brgyad ma'i 'grel pa (pp. 148.3.4-154.4.6)
(2) Chag lo tsā ba'i zhus lan (pp. 411.3.3-412.1.3)
(3) Mkhas 'jug (KJ) (pp. 81.4.2-82.1.1)
(4) Sdom geum rab dbye (DS) (pp. 320.3.1-6)
Other sources give more intimate views of his personality, for instance on his
indebtedness to Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan for his intellectual flowering, og
his assessment of himself and his own accomplishments, and on his feelings of
disillusionment because of the hostile reception his works received. To list just
a few:
(5) Phyogs bcu'i sange rayas daug byang chub sems dpa! rnans la zhubali
'phrin yig (p. 327.3.4, et passin)
(6) Rile btsun rin po che grass pa rgyal mtshan gyi bstod pa (p. 321.3.5)
(7) Lam zab mo bla ma'i rnal 'byor (p. 340.4.4)
(8) Sdeb sbyor sna tshogs me tog gi chun po (p. 141.1.2)
II. Biographies by His Students
The next group of primary sources consists of those accounts that his own
disciples set down in writing. These fall into two groupa: (A) those that were
written while Sa-pap was alive, and (B) those that were composed after his death.
A. Contemporaneous Accounts
Two of Sa-pan's students wrote biographies of him when he was still living
but after his debate with Harinanda (c. 1240). They and their works are:
(1) Lho-pa kun-michyen Rin-chen-dpal, Dpal ldan sa skya pandita'i roam thar
kun mkhyen rin chen dpal gyis mdzad pa, Lam 'bras slobbshad, vol. 1 (ka).
Pp. 385.1-578,1.



par
(2) Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, Dpal Idan sa skye pandita chen poll roam
thar pa, SKKB, vol. 5, pp. 433.2.1-438.4,6.
Lho-pa's work in particular was composed in the last few years before Sa-pan's
departure from Tibet in 1244 since he mentions Sa-pan's debate with Harinanda, and
specifies that at the time of composition Sa-pan was dwelling in Dbu-ru': Klungs
Skyi-shod. One cannot date the second work as precisely. Both consist for the
most part of records of Sa-paņ's studies, and the former is the most detailed and
definitive.
B. Posthumous Accounts
by his younger
Three works survive which seem to have been written
disciples:
(1) 'Phags-pa Blo-gros-rgyal-mtahan, Chos nje pa'i rnam thar badus pa, SKKB,
vol. 6, pp. 31.3.3-32.1.2 (pa 626.3-63b.2).
(2) Yar-klungs-pa [Byang-chub-rgyal-mtshan?], Bla ma chos kyi rje dpal ldan
sa skya pandita chen po'i rnam par thar pa mdor bsdus pa.
(3) Yar-klungs-pa Graga-pa-rgyal-mtshan, Chos kystes akya pandita kun
dga! rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po'i rnam par thar pa 'bring po, Lam 'bras
slob bshad, vol. 1 (ka), pp. 32b.1-38b.1.
The first, which is by his nephew 'Phags-pa (1235-1280), was written in Liang-chou
and is mainly useful as an account of Sa-pan's final years. The second work is a
short verafled eulogy. Commonly called the Chog rgyal me, it is found in Sa-
skya-pachos spyod texts. In it too the account of his final days is pre-
dominant. According to the colophon it was written by "rise par smraba Yar
klunga pa" at Liang-chou in the lunar month after Sa-pan's passing. The third is
also a versified eulogy, though much longer and with many more details. Its
proper title seems to be Chos kyi rje sa skya papdita kun dga' rgyal mtshandpal
bzang po la bstod pa. More than half its length was devoted to telling of Sa-
pan's last years and death. Its author appears to have been a disciple of Sa-pan,
though this is not definitely established.
SES



C. Lost Biographies by His Students
In addition to these, one reads in later sources that, other disciples also
. For instance, the A mdo chos byung of Dkon-mchog-bstan-pa-
rab-rgyas (vol. 1, p. 21.5 [11a.5]) mentions a biography by "U-yug-pa Rigs-pa'1-
seng-ge. The Gaung seros ma biography printed in both the Lam 'bras slobbshed
and Ngor-chen's collected works lists in its colophon (Lam 'bras slob bshad, vol.
1 [ka], p. 670.5) not only the biographies by Lho-pa and Zhang, but also by the
following:
Duar-ston Chos-kyi-rgyal-po
Bi-ji Rin-chen-grags
Dam-pa Kun-dga'-grags (-Sga A-gnyan-dam-pa)
Bar-ston Rdo-rje-rgyal-mtshan
The same colophon is found in a manuacript of this gsung saros from Glo-bo
(Mustang) published in Selected Biographies of Sa-akya-pa Lam 'bras Masters (Dehra
Dun: Sakya Centre, 1985), p. 173 (kha 33a). A-mes-zhabs in his biography of
Sngags-'chang Kun-dga'-rin-chen (Srid pa gaum, P. 265.3) does mention a Gaung
sgros ma biography by B1-j1, though it is now unavailable. Biographies by the
remaining three authors, however, are otherwise completely unknown.
III. Full-length Biographies
by Authors of Later Generations
Among the secondary sources at least three full-length biographies
known:
(1) [Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po? (1389-1456)], Opal sa skya pandita'i rnam
thar gsung agros ma, Lam 'bras slob bshad, vol. 1 (ka), pp. 57a-67a; SKKB,
vol. 9, pp. 30.3.4-36.3.5.
(2) Mang-thos Klu-sgrub-rgya-mtsho (1523-1596). Jam dbyanura bla ma sa skya
papdita'i ngo mtshar rtogs br jod dpal si 'khri shing val 'dab nyer scia pa
dang de'i 'grel pa.
(3) Rin-spungs-pa Ngag-dang-'jig-rten-dbang-phyug-graga-pa (1542-1625?).
Jam dbyangs mi'i srid pa sa skya pandita kun dga' rgyal mtshan dpal bzang



po'i rtogs pa brod pa bakal pe bzang po' lege lam, Lam 'bras slob bahad,
vol. 1 (ka), pp. 67a-145a.
The first is a work which purports to combine the contents of six bio-
graphies listed above, all but two of which are now unavailable. The colophon
does not specify the name of its compiler. It is included in the Derge edition
of Ngor-chen's works and is attributed to Ngor-chen by A-nes-habs in his biogra-
phy of Sngaga-'chang Kun-dga'-rin-chen Srid pa gsum. p. 200.4) and by Zhu-chen
Tshul-khrims-rin-chen in the latter's asan yig (Dpal ldan, vol. 1, p. 613.4 - ka
3078.4): than thar goung sgros ma rje rdo rje 'chang gis mdzad pa. Its basic
content, however, is similar to that of the Lan 'bras history by Bla-na-dan-pa
Bsod-nans-rgyal-atshan (1312-1375) and to the Lan 'bras history included in the
great De nyid Idus pe compilation of Bo-dong Pan-chen Phyoga-las-rnan-rgyal (1375-
1451) (Encyclopedia Tibetica, vol. 106, pp. 540.3-557.2). Probably both the Gsung
attributed to Ngor-chen and the work in Bo-dong's compilation derive from
Bla-ma-dam-pa Bsod-name-rgyal-mtshan's history. The second work listed above is
unfortunately not yet available. It is included in the list of Klu-agrub-rgya-
mtsho's works in a modern bibliographical compilation. Probably at consisted of
a versified basic work with a prose commentary. The third later biography, the
one by Rin-apunga-pa, is a very long work in verse with many small explanatory
notes (uchan bu). It was completed by its eminent author in 1579.
IV. Genealogical Histories
Accounts of Sa-pap's life are also found in the family histories of the Sa-
skya 'Khon. Several such histories existed in the past, but the most famous is
that of A-ses-chabs Ngag-dang-kun-dga'-bsod-nams (1597-1659), which was struc-
tured around the versified adung rabs by Dkon-achbg-Thun-grub (1497-1557). A-ses-
zhabs's work has the ponderous title "Dzam gling byang phyors kys thub pa't trval
tahab chen po dpal Idan sa akya pa'i edung rabs rin po che 11 Itar byon pali tshul
gyi roam par thar. 24 nro. mtshar rin po che'i bang mdzod deos 'dod kun "byung. In
the recent reprint of this work in its Derge edition, the biography of Sa-pap is
found on pages 93.6-170.6.° A-mes-zhabs copied this biography almost verbatim
from Glo-bo akhan-chen's Michas jug roam bahad.



V. Religious Histories
Sa-pan's life story is also briefly told in various religious histories,
including both general works and those that relate the origins of particular
lineages. In the completion (Itsom 'phro kha skong) by Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshoga
(b. 1649) of the Ngor chos 'byung, for instance, there is an important biographi-
cal sketch (pp. 314.6-321.7). Also in the histories by the Sa-akya-pa scholars
Mang-thos Klu-sgrub-rgya-mtsho (1523-1596) (Bstan rtsis pp. 796-82a) and Rta
mkhan-po Chos-rnam-rgyal (fl. 17th c.) (Bstan padang batandin gyllo TRUS,
pp. 75a-76b, 816-85a) one finds biographical accounts. Sa-pan was also a transmit-
ter of seemingly every Sa-skya-pa lineage that has a separately recorded history
(chos 'byung) and his 11fe story is accordingly found for instance in the dif-
ferent Lam 'bras khog phubs, such as those by Bla-ma-dam-pa Bsod-nams-rgyal-mtahan
(1312-1375), by Gnyan-ston 'Dul-ba-seng-ge (mentioned in KhJNSH, p. 26b.2), by A-
mes-zhabs, and by the unidentified author of the Lam 'bras history in Bo-dong
Pan-chen's De nyid "dus pa collection. He is also mentioned in the chos 'byunga
of Bde-mchog," Mgon-po," and Rdo-rje-phur-pa.
13
VI. Political and General Histories
In the political and more general histories too one finds brief accounts of
Sa-pan's life and deeds. He is mentioned, for instance, in the following:
(1) Tahal-pa Kun-dga'-rdo-rje (fl. 14th c.), Deb ther dmar
Composed in 1346.
po, p. 49.14
(2) Stag-tahang-rdzong-pa Dpal-'byor-bzang-po (fl. early-15th c.), Rava bod!
yig tshang chen mo (U. of Washington MS), p. 194a (Chengdu, Mi-rige-dpe-
skrun-khang, 1985 ed., pp. 322.). Composed in 1434.
(3) Pap-chen Baod-nams-grags-pa (1478-1554), Debther duar. Po asar ma, PP.
49b ff. Composed in 1538.
(4) Dpa'-bo Gtsug-lag-phreng-ba (1503/4-1566), Mkhas pa'i dga! ston, vol.
9(3), pp. 760f, 794€ (ba 5b, ma 19a-20a). Composed in 1565.
(5) Dalai bla-ma V, Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-rgya-mtaho (1617-1682), Gangs can
yul ayi sa la spyod pa't mtho rls kyi rgyal blon atso bor br fod pa'i deb



ther rdzogs ldan gzhon nu'i dga' ston dpyid kyi raval no'1 glu dbyange, pp.
113-115. Composed in 1643. .
VII. Commentaries on Sa-pap's Works
Tibetan commentators sometimes prefaced their compositions with a bio-
graphical sketch of the author whose work they were about to expound. Three
noteworthy examples of this are found in the following texts:
(1) Spoe-khang-pa Rin-chen-rgyal-otshan (f1. early-15th c.). Sdom s um svi
rab tudbye ba'szhung lugs lega par bshad pa, vol. 1, pp. 9.1-24.3.
Composed in 1427.
(2) Go-rams-pa Bsod-nama-aeng-ge (1429-1489), Sdom pa ssum rab tu dbye ba'i
rnam bahad rgyal ba'i gsung rab kyi dgonge geal, vol. 14, PP. 125.4.2-
130.1.1 (ta 14b.2-220.1). Composed in 1463.
(1456-1532), KhJNSH, pp. 47b.4-
(3) Glo-bo mkhan-chen Baod-nam-lhun-grub
776.5 (94.4-154.5). Composed in 1527.
VIII. Biographies of a Great Lama's Previous Embodiments
Sa-pap was said by some to have been one of the previous embodiments of the
Pag-chen Rin-po-che, and accordingly there existed the following biography in the
series of biographies of those incarnations. The author was Pan-chen I Blo-bzang-
chos-kyi-rgyal-otshan, and the work was entitled Chos kyi ce sakys pandita kun
dga' rgyal mtshan ayi rtoga [ par br jod?l pa dri za'i glu dbyangs.
IX. Miscellaneous
One can find references to Sa-pap in various vorks, such as in accounts of
the histories of the various branches of literary scholarship, guides to places of
pilgrimage, lists of teachings received (thob yis), and supplicatory prayers to
1ineages. Verses of praise addressed to him can also contain interesting histori-
cal information. In addition there are the following two works that contain



fairly long accounts of events from his life but which do not fit neatly anywhere
in the above classifications:
(1) Gaer-mgog pan-chen Shakya-mchog-ldan (1428-1507), Chos kyi 'khor lo bskor
ba'i rnan azhag 11 ltar grub pa'i yi ge gzu bor gnas pa'i mdzange pa dga'
byed, Collected Works, vol. 16, pp. 465-469.
(2) [Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen] (1700-1769?), Dpal sa skya'i rrje btsun
gong ma inga'i gsung rab rin po che'i par ayi sgo 'phar 'byed pa'i dkar
chag 'phrul gys lde mig, SXKB, vol. 7, pp. 315.1.2-316.2.6 (ba 4195.2-
4216.6).
The first gives good Information on the great convocation of 1216 at which Sa-pan
presided, probably based in large part on the biography of Grags-pa-rgyal-mtahan
by Sa-pan. The second contains a biographical sketch that seems to be based on
the Ngoc choi 'byung
X. Recent Compositions
Recently there have also appeared a number of treatments of Sa-pan's life
by living Tibetan scholars. Here I will list only the following four :
(1) Mkhan-po Sangs-rgyas-bstan-'dzin, Legs bshad 'dod dgu "byung ba'i ster
mdzod (Legs par bshad pa rin po che'i gter gyl. don 'grel blo gal bung ba't
bsti gnas), pp. pp. 3-25.
(2) Shes-rab-rgyal-mtshan, A-mi-pa, Rgyal batan spyi dang. bye bras le btsun
sa skya pa't batan dzin dang bcas pa byon tshul sy rnam par thar pa shin
tu mdor bsdus pa ngo mtshar rgya mtsho'i chu thig, pp. 37-42.-
(3) Gdong-thog sprul-sku Batan-pa'i-rgyal-mtshan, Byang phyogethub pa'i
rgyal tshab dpal Idan se skya pa'i bstan pa rin po che li ltar byung ba'1.
lo rgyus rab 'byams zhing du snyan pa'i sgra dbyange, pp. 93.1-99.4 (47a.1-
50a.4).
(4) Dge-bshes Thugs-rje-dbang-phyug, 'Phage bod du rayal bstan spyi dang bye
bragdpal ldan so skya pa'i betan pa rin po che 'i lo rayus neemtshar nor
bu'l bang mdzod, pp. 136-153.21



These recent studies do not have the historiographical importance of the earlier
sources, and I have not relied upon them. In the following biographical sketch,
except where specifically noted, the information derives from either the autobio-
graphical passages or the earliest biographies. Before beginning that sketch,
however, I should conclude this survey by putting the main biographical sources in
a different perspective, listing twenty-two of them consecutively in their ap-
proximate chronological order. The Roman numerals in parentheses refer to the
sections above where each was described.
Table 1
The Main Accessible Accounts of Sa-skya Pandita's Life
Listed in Chronological Order
1. Lho-pa kun-mkhyen Rin-chen-dpal. Composed early 1240s. (II.2.1)
2. Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal. Composed early 1240s. (II.1.2)
3. Yar-klung-pa (Byang-chub-rgyal-mtshan?). Composed 1251. (II.B.2)
4. 'Phags-pa B1o-gros-rgyal-mtshan. Composed 1250s? (II.B.1)
5. Yar-klung-pa (Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan?). Composed late-13th c.? (II.B.3)
6. Bla-ma-dam-pa Bsod-name-royal-mtshan. Composed 1344. (V)
7. Tahal-pa Kun-dga'-rdo-rje. Composed 1346. (VI.1)
8. Spos-khang-pa Rin-chen-rgyal-mtshan. Composed 1427. (VII.1)
9. Stag-tshang-rdzong-pa Dpal-'byor-bzang-po. Composed 1434. (VI.2)
10. Bo-dong Pan-chen (?). Composed before 1452. (V)
11. Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po [?). Composed before 1457? (III.1)
12. Go-rama-pa Bsod-nang-seng-ge. Composed 1463. (VII.2)
13. Glo-bo mkhan-chen Rood-nams-lhun-grub. Composed 1527. (VII.3)
14. Pan-chen Bsod-nams-grags-pa. Composed 1538. (VI.3)
15. Dpa'-bo Gtsug-lag-phreng-ba. Composed 1565. (VI.4)
16. Mang-thos Klu-agrub-rgya-mtsho. Composed 1578. (V)
17. Rin-spungs-pa Ngag-dbang-jigs-med-grags-pa. Composed 1579. (III.3)
18. Rta-nag mkhan-po Chos-rnam-rgyal. Composed first half 17th c.? (V)
19. A-mes-zhabs Ngag-dbang-kun-dga'-bsod-nams. Composed 1629, based on no. 13,
above (VII.3). See also the other works of A-nes-zhabs in (V).
20. Dalat bla-ma V Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-rgya-mtsho. Composed 1643. (V1.5)
21. Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs. Composed late 17th c.? (V)
22. [Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen). Composed 1736. (IX.2)



Chronology of the Main Events in Sa-pan's Life
Sa-pap was born in the spring of 1182." He was the first son of Dpal-
chen-'od-po, and was at birth the likely heir to the spiritual legacy of the Sa-
skya-pas. The monastery of Sa-skya was then a religious establishment known
throughout Tibet. Founded in 1073 by 'Khon Dkon-achog-rgyal-po, it had in the
following century von great eminence as the seat of Dkon-nchog-rgyal-po's son, Sa-
chen Kun-dga'-snying-po (1092-1158), who was one of the greatest Tantric scholars
and adepts of his age. Sa-chen was succeeded mainly by his two sons Slob-dpon
Bsod-nams-rtse-mo (1142-1182) and Rje-btsun Grage-pa-rgyal-mtshan (1147-1216).
Both had adopted the celibate life and were famed religious teachers. Sa-chen's
first son had died as a young man while studying in India. His fourth and only
remaining son was Sa-pap's father, a lay meditator and doctor, whose duty it was
to perpetuate the family line and look after their secular interests.
The year of Sa-pan's birth had already seen the premature passing of his
uncle Bsod-nams-rtse-mo; thus there must have been special rejoicing at the birth
of this first son of the next generation.
Early Studies
The infant was given the name Dpal-ldan-don-grub ("Glorious Siddhartha"),
an indication of the high hopes placed in him. He was a remarkably-or even
miraculously--precocious youngster, if we can believe the accounts of his dis-
ciple-biographers. As an infant he is said to have written Indian characters in
the dirt while playing on the ground and then to have carefully avoided crawling
over them. In any case, there is no reason to doubt that he was exceptionally
intelligent and that this became apparent from his very early childhood.
Sa-pa (as I will anachronistically call him) began his formal education by
the age of five or six. One of his main early teachers was his uncle Grass-pa-
rgyal-mt shan and the other was his father. The most important subjects of these
childhood studies were the numerous Tantric rituals followed in his family, and
which they were based. He had to memorize each text and give proof
of his understanding at a public recitation and explication. His memory was good;
already at the age of seven or eight he correctly recited Saroruhavajra's sadhana
of Hevajra and other sādhanas. At age ten or eleven he recited and expounded
the Heva framúlatantra. After that he recited the Pafjara and Samputa, and by the
age of fourteen (1196) he is said to have received and understood all the central
ritual practices that had come down from his ancestors. From his father he also



learned medicine and prognostication, while at the feet of Grags-pa-rgyal-mt:shan
he continued to receive more and more of the great corpus of tantric teachings
that Sa-chen had gathered and transmitted to his sons. In the meantime he also
learned various practical subjects such as calligraphy, drawing, painting, and
astrological calculations.
Auspicious Dreams
In the year 1199 when Sa-pap was seventeen he had to dreams that presaged
his future greatness as a scholar. One dream was that a saffron-clad monk named
Vasubandhu vas expounding the Abhidharmakośa before the great A-phyi stupa at Sa-
akya, and Sa-pan himself was seated there, listening reverently to the exposition.
In the second dream he dreamt that he was at a very pleasant place called
"Dignāga's Cave" at "Cakranagara (?) ('Khor-lo-can), a district in Vijayakpetra
in eastern India. There he was given the key to many volumes of scripture on
Pramana, including the Pramāpasamuccaya and the seven treatises of Dharmakirti.
Sa-pan's later biographers attached a great significance to these dreams, as Abhi-
dharma and Pramana were indeed two subjects in which he excelled and which he
propagated widely as a mature scholar.
Youthful Travels and Studies
When Sa-pap was in his late teens it was decided that he should be sent to
other parts of Tibet to pursue further studies under renowned scholars. He was to
study the Madhyamaka, Abhidharma and the Five Dharmas of Maitreya, but above all
he was to learn Pranāņa. Though Grags-pa-rgyal-atshan was one of the finest
Tantric and general Mahāyāna teachers in all Tibet, as a youth he had been de-
prived of the chance to study at one of the great seninaries of Dbus or Gtsang.
Instead, he had learned the scholastic treatises from his older brother or from
other scholars who came to Sa-skya. Now Grags-pa-rgyal-mtahan must have felt
satisfaction seeing that his promising nephew was about to follow in the footsteps
of Sa-chen and Bood-nans-rtse-mo, who in their youths had both left sa-skya to
study at great seminaries in Central Tibet.
Sa-pap left So-skya in 1200 at the age of eighteen and Journeyed to
"Phrang in the upper Nyang valley." There he joined the monk-scholar Zhu-ston
Rdo-rje-akyabs, who was also a disciple of Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan. Under Zhu-ston
at Phrang (and later at Sa-skya), Sa-pan studied the Five Dharmas of Maitreya



with their commentaries, four of Nagarjuna's "Yukti-corpus" (rige tshoga) trea-
tises, the Satyadvayavibhanga of Jñanagarbha, and the Madhyamakalapkāra of Santa-
Taksita.29
Then, sometime in the next year (1201), Sa-par left Zhu-ston to study
with the 1llustrious scholastic master Meshur Gahon-nu-seng-ge, who was teaching
at the temple of Rkyang-'dur which was nearby in Upper Nyang. This teacher was
the student of the famed Gt sang-nag-pa and of the latter's foremost disciple. He
taught Sa-paņ tvo new subjects: Pramāņa and the Prasangika Madhyamaka. For the
first his text was Dharmakirti's Pramāpaviniscaya (PVin), and for the latter he
taught the Prasannapada of Candrakirti. These studies were interrupted in 1203
by the serious 1llness and death of Sa-pap's father; because of this, So-pap had
to return to Sa-skys. Later, however, he was able to return to Rkyang-'dur and
give a formal exposition of the PVin, his first formal scholastic teaching. In
the years 1203-1204 during his home visits Sa-pap also pursued his interests in
gramatical and musical studies, and he even seems to have learned some Sanskrit
from Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan.
Studies with Sākyasribhadra and
the Other Three Pundits
In the following year (1204) when passing through Gt sang Chung on the
road between Rkyang-'dur and Sa-skya, Sa-pan met an Indian master who would have a
great influence over his development as a scholastic philosopher. This was the
Kashmiri pandita Säkyasribhadra, who had recently arrived in Tibet through the
Invitation of Khro-phu lo-tsa-ba. He was then teaching the Pin, and Sa-pan
Joined these lectures. These studies together, however, did not last long because
Sakyadri left for Dbus by the summer of 1205. Nevertheless, Sa-pan was able to
continue his studies under en Indian pandita because he arranged for one of the
other scholars in Säkyasri's entourage, Sugatasri, to act as his tutor and to
accompany him back to Sa-skya.
Sa-pap seems to have spent most of the next three years (1205-1207) at his
home temple of Sa-skya, assiduously studying Sanskrit texts with Sugatasri. The
works they studied included treatises on Sanskrit grammar, poetics (alapkāre-
kästra), kävya, lexicography, and drama." As for philosophical and doctrinal
studies, Sa-pap and his tutor mainly covered Pramana and Tantra. Within a short
time Sa-pan was translating from Sanskrit to Tibetan; the biographer Lho-pa Rin-
chen-dpal names some seven works that Sa-paņ worked at translating under the
guidance of this pandita.



27
Sa-pap rejoined Šakyasri by 1208, and it was then at Nyang-smad Rgyan-gong
that he took full monastic ordination from the great Kashmiri upadhyaya, assisted
by two of his Tibetan teachers and in the midst of a great assembly of monks.
From then until about 1213, Sa-pap spent much time with Sākyasri, studying San-
skrit grammar, Pramana, the Abhisamayālapkāra, the Mahayānasamgraha, Abhidharma,
various minor works of Vasubandhu, Prajñāpāranitā, Vinaya, and Vajrayana.96 In
1210 Sakyasri spent the rainy season retreat at Sa-akya. Perhaps at this time
Sa-pap worked with him on retranslating the Pramāņavārttika.
During these years the panditas Samghasri and Vibhūti accompanied Šakyasri
at least part of the time, and Sa-pan was able to receive certain teachings that
they requested from Säkyasri. In addition, Sa-pap sometimes studied individu-
ally under Samghasri. They worked mainly on Pranāņa, but also on the Abhi sama-
Yalapkāra, Madhyamaka, and Tantra. He also studied with the pandita Dānasila
some minor works of Pramāṇa and part of the commentary on the Amarakosa.
Later Studies with Tibetan Teachers
Even after his extensive studies under the four panditas So-pap seems to
have continued to cultivate more learning through studies at the feet of two more
outstanding teachers of Tibet. These were Brtsega-ston Dbang-phyug-seng-ge and
Spyi-bo-1has-pa Byang-chub-'od. With the first he studied Madhyamaka, Pramapa.
and the Dharmas of Maitreya. With the latter, a disciple of Grags-pa-rgyal-
mtshan who had assisted at Sa-pan's ordination, he studied Prajnaparamitā, Abhi-
dharma, and various major and minor instructions from the lineages then
in Tibet, such as the Phyag råva chen po, the Rdzogs pa chen po, and the precepts
of the Bka-gdams-pa. Spyi-bo-has-pa gave some of these teachings to Sa-pan in
Sa-skya itself. During this period Sa-paņ too probably gave some instructions,
either as a teaching-assistant of his masters or on his own."
The Death of Crags-pa-rgyal-mtshan
In 1216 Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan passed away. This event marked the end of
one era and the beginning of another. Now, with no other male member of the
preceding generation remaining, Sa-pan came into his own as the great religious
master of Sa-akya. In this same year he presided at a large memorial convocation
in Sa-skya.



Noteworthy Events from His Later Career in Tibet.
Sa-pap's activities during the next twenty-eight years are nowhere recorded
in detail. But these were his most productive years as a scholar, and his most
active years as a teacher. In about 1219, when Sa-pan was thirty-seven years of
age, he is said to have composed his masterpiece on Pramapa, the Rise gter.
This was but one of quite a number of major works that issued from his pen in this
and the following decades. In the year 1225 he is recorded to have been in Samye,
for it was there and then that he met the 'Bri-gung-pa hierarch Dbon Shes-rab-
'byung-gnas." He was also teaching actively elsewhere during these decades, and
it was probably during this period that he lived and taught for some time at
Shangs Sreg-shing."
In about 1232 he is said to have composed his great doctrinal polemic, the
Sdom sun rab dbye. Three years later in 1235 there occurred the happy event of
the birth of Sa-pap's first fraternal nephew and ultimate successor, "Phags-pa.
But then only four years later in 1239, Zangs-tsha, who was 'Phags-pa's father and
Sa-pan's only brother, died. The latter left behind five wives and some eight
young children, including three sons. Sa-paņ would seem to have taken responsibi-
lity for 'Phags-pa from about this time.
In about 1240 Sa-pan and the five-year-old 'Phags-pa travelled to Skynd-
grong near the modern border of Nepal. This was apparently the occasion when
Sa-pap accomplished his famous defeat of the Brahmanical pandita Harinanda in
debate. Then, sometime in the next two or three years, Sa-pan was back in Dbus,
staying for some time at Skyid-shod Dga'-ldan. In 1243 he presided at a great
religious convocation in which 'Phags-pa gave his first public exposition of a
religious text. 52
Se-pap's Departure from Tibet and His Death
Sa-pan's career as a great religious teacher in Dbus and Gtsang came to an
end in 1244, for this is when he received a summons to the court of the Mongol
prince Kodan for the purpose of negotiating the submission of Tibet to the Mon-
gols. In the same year, perhaps just before leaving Central Tibet, he ordained
"Phags-pa in the temple of the Jo-bo (Jo-khang) in Lha-30. He then travelled
slowly and with great dignity through Eastern Tibet, giving many religious in-
structions along the way. He finally reached Liang-chou, the capital of Kodan, in
the fire-horse year (late 1246?), and he had his first audience with Kodin in
the first lunar month of the following fire-sheep year (1247). His mission to



the Mongols was a great success. Tibet was spared an invasion, and the Sa-sky-
pas received a grant of supremacy."
Sa-pap did not live to see Tibet again. He passed away at Liang-chou in
Late 1251 on the fourteenth day of the eleventh lunar month, amidst many auspi-
cious portents."



Table 2
A Chronological Chart of the Main Events
in Sa-pap's Life
Year
Age
Event
1182
Birth in Sa-skya
1189-1195
7-13
Early studies and examinations in the main sadhanas and the
Hevajra Tantras
1196
Completion of the basic ritual and scriptural studies of
his family lineage
1199
17
Auspicious dreams presaging greatness in Pramäņa and Abhi-
dharma studies
1200
Goes to "Phrang in Nyang-stod, studies with Zhu-ston
1201
studies
Pramäņa and
Goes to Rkyang-'dur in Nyang-stod,
Prasangika vith Mtshur-ston
120321
Illness and death of father. Returns temporarily to Sa-
skya. Then gives first formal exposition in Rkyang-'dur.
1204
22
Meets Sākyarībhadra in Gtsang Chu-mig
1205-120723-25
Studies at Sa-skya with Sugatasri
1208 WWE 26
Rejoins Säkyaári. Takes full monastic ordination at Nyang-
smad Rgyan-gong
1210
Sākyabri stays at Sa-skya for the rainy-season retreat
12133 1
(and eventually
SäkyaSri leaves Gtsang for Mnga'-ris
Kashmir).



(Table 2, cont.)
Year
Age
Event
A great
The death of Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan.
memorial convocation at Sa-skya.
c.1219
37
Composes the Rigs gter at Sa-skya
122543
Meets the 'Bri-gung-pa master Sher-'byung at Samye
c.1232
50
Composes the Sdom gsum rab dbye
1235
53
Birth of Phags-pa
123957
Death of brother, Zangs-tsha
c.1240
5 8
J ourney to Skyid-grong and debate with Harinanda
1241-1242
59-60
Stays some time in Dbu-ru Skyid-shod Dgal-Idan
1243
6
1
Presides at a great religious convocation
1244
62
Ordains
'Phags-pa at the Jo-khang
in
Mongol summons.
Lhasa.
1245-1246
63-64
Travels through Khams and A-ndo
1246?
64
Arrival in Liang-chou late in the horse year
1247
Meets the Mongol prince Kodan, first lunar month of the
sheep year
1251
69
Death In Liang-chou, 14th day of the 11th lunar sonth



NOTES
*The first modern account of Sa-pan's life was given by S. C. Das in his
"The Lives of the Par-chen Rinpoches or Tasi Lamas," which appeared as part of his
Contributions on Tibet, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Bengal, vol. 51
(1882), pp. 15€. See also the reprint by Manjusri Publications, New Delhi, 1970.
Das's account was based on the biography that appears in the First Pap-chen Rin-
po-che''Khrung rabs, on which see below. C. G. Tucci (1949), pp. 412-414,
416f. This succession of lives was also the subject of a series of blockprint
illustrations. For the depiction of Sa-pan, see 1bid.. p. 431, fig. 95.
The next account to appear was that of G. Huth (1892-96), pp. 765 and 123.
This was the text and translation of the biographical sketch contained in the Hor.
chos byung of 'Jigs-med-rdo-rje, Some fifty years later G. Tucci (1949) pub-
lished a part of the Fifth Dalai Lama's history, including (pp. 625f) the passage
on Sa-pan. The next significant biographical sketch was that of J. Bosson
(1969), pp. 2-7, who used the above-mentioned studies as well as the general
historical sources then available.
A recent study of note is that of D. Schuh (1977), who investigated espe-
cially the last years of Sa-pan's life. On p. 16 he analyzed the biography of Sa-
pay found in A-mes-zhabs's Dzam eling (-Sa skya'i dung rabe chen mol. which
ultimately derives from Glo-bo mkhan-chen's KhJNSh.
A list of some biographies of Sa-pap has appeared in A-khu-chin, MHTL, nos.
10912-10915. Dkon-achog-bstan-pa-rab-rgyas in his A ado chos 'yung, vol. 1, p. 21
(lla) lists five biographies of Sa-pan.
"Lho-pa, p. 566.6: chos kyi rgyal po nyid dbu ru't klungs skyi shod kyi
dben gnas (57a) dga' Idan na bzhugs pa'i tshe ... Tin chen dpal gyis badebs
so//. For mention of the debate, see p. 53b.3. See also below, chapter 5, note
22.
Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, p. 437.4.5: deng sang gi bor du axhung luga duma
rayun ma chad par 'chad pa nas/. For the mention of the debate, see p. 438.1.6.
Note that Tucci (1949), p. 680, note 35, wrongly attributes this biography to Sa-
pan himself.
"The version I have had access to is from a recent Indian blockprint Sa
skya chos spyod. In it this work appears on pp. 195.1-248.4.



"This is supported by Zhu-chen, Gsan yig (Dpal ldan ble ma), vol. 1, P.
608.4 (ka 304b.4): sa skys pandi tali rnam thar bstod pa chos rgyal na chung ba
yar lung pa byang chub royal mtshan gyis mdzad pa. But according to Sangs-rgyas-
phun-tshoga, Rt som phro, p. 320, the brief biography (rnam thar badus pa) was by
Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, as is explained in the following note. Yar-
klungs-pa Byang-chub-rgyal-utshan is found among a list of seven junior disciples
who had the final name "rgyal-mtshan." He apparently participated in the full-
ordination ceremony of 'Phags-pa in 1255. According to Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs,
1b1d., Yar-klungs-pa Grage-pa-rgyal-mtshan was sometimes added to the above list
of seven to make the group of "eight junior disciples with the final name 'rgyal-
mtshan."
"The colophon ascribes this work to Yar-klungs-pa Graga-pa-rgyal-mtshan,
though the colophon itself was probably added later by someone else (it uses the
honorific verb ndzad with reference to the author). In the colophon, this work is
specified as being the "medium" (bar pa) version. However, Sangs-rgyas-phun-
tshoga, p. 320.3 (59b.3), attributes a "brief" (badus pa) version to Yar-klungs-pa
Grags-pa-rgyal-atshan, while stating that the extensive versified biography (rnam
thar tahigs bcad ma egyas pa) was by Yar-klunga-pa Byang-chub-rgyal-utshan: de
yans yar lung pa byang chub Eryal mtshan ni/ chos Ele'i rnam thar tshiga bcad ma
rgyas partsoms [sic] pa po yin la/ rnam thar badus partsons pa po var lung pa
groga pa raval mtshan yang banan nas exval atshan nthal can brgyad ces bya'o/I.
This account is derived from Klu-sgrub-rgya-atsho, Batan rtsis, P. 830.5.
This is the Sa skya pa'i dkar chag compiled by the Venerable Khenpo Appey
and others, soon to be published by Ngawang Topgyal, New Delhi. See also D.
Jackson (1983), pp. 4f.
Delhi (or Dolanji?), 1975.
9A-mes-zhabs, Yongs rdzogs, pp. 1938.
"Lambras bla ma tahad ma'i lo tryus, Encyclopedia Tibetica (New Delhi:
1969), vol. 106, pp. 540.3-557.2.
"A-mes-zhabs, Dpal ldan sa, pp. 520.4-523.2 (103b.2-1050.2).
124-mes-zhabs, Dpal rdo rje, vol. 1, pp. 347.2-360.4.



34
*'Jam-dbyanga Dpal-Idan-rgya-atsho, Gesang mkhan-chen, Rdo rie phur pa't
chos 'byung bsdus pa, pp.188.5f.
***Tahal-pa Kun-dga'-rdo-rje, Deb ther dmar po (Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun
khang, 1981), P. 49.
*Bsod-nams-grags-pa, Reval rabs, PP. 496 ff. For text and translation,
see G. Tucci (1971), pp. 182ff.
Dpa'-bo Gtsug-lag-phreng-ba, Mkhas pa'i dga' ston, Sata-pitaka Series,
vol. 9 (3), pp. 760f, 794€ (be 5b, ma, 19a-20a).
''Dalai bla- V, Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-rgya-ntsho, Gangs can (Dharamsala:
Shes rig par khang, 1981), pp. 113-115.
This work is fairly common. Prints (apparently from the Bkra-shis-Thun-
po edition) exist for instance at the Bihar Research Society, Patna (catalogue no.
710) and at the India Office Library, London (see the catalogue of P. Denvood, no.
120).
For an instance of a biographical sketch found in prayers or verses of
praise, see Shakya-mchog-ldan, Sa skya pan chen la betod pa, vol. 17, pp. 21-23.
See also Go-rams-pa, Phar, phyin dang tshad ma, Collected Works, Sa skya pa' bka
*bum, vol. 11, pp. 22.3.3-23.2.1 (ka 43b.3-45a.1).
20 see
See also the English translation, A Waterdrop from the Glorious Sea
(Rikon: 1976), pp. 36-40.
See also the English translation by J. Schoening, "The Sa-skya Throne
Holder Lineage," M. A. Thesis, University of Washington, 1983, pp. 95-117.
According to the short verse biography by Yar-klungs-pa (Byang-chub-
rgyal-mtshan?), p. 195.3, his birth took place on "dpyid zla ra ba yt/ nyi shu
drug."
*This eldest son of Sa-chen is not mentioned. by Zhang.
(p. 433.3.6), Sa-chen had only three sons.
According to him
See Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, p. 434.1.2.



The studies with his father seem to be recorded only by Zhang,
435.2.2. Lho-pa does not mention them.
P.
"V According to Zhang, p. 437.4.3: dgung lo bdun lon pa na. But in Yar-
klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, p. 32b.6: dgung lo deu par. The chronologies
given by Zhang, Yar-klungs-pa, and the Gsung sgros me differ a bit.
For example, Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, p. 33a.3.
"Ibid., p. 33a.5. On this teacher see also D. Jackson (1985a), p. 23.
"Lho-pa, p. 515.4. Lho-pa lists Sa-pan's studies with this master quite
late in the biography, whereas he mentions Meshur-ston as the first teacher in-
mediately after Grags-pa-rgyal-it shan (see p. 486.6).
Syar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, p. 33a.6.
31 Lho-pa, p. 486.6.
According to Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, p. 33a.6, they met when
Sa-pap had left Mtshur-ston following Sa-pan's exposition of the PVin. The Gaung
sgros ma, however, states that Sa-pap was then coming from Sa-skya. See below,
chapter 5, notes 12 and 17.
"Lho-pa, pp. 49a,3f.
**Ibid. On the Pramäņa works they studied together in particular see
below, chapter 5, note 28.
The Gaung sgros me here Inexplicably gives the wrong date--1206--for his
ordination. See Lam 'bras slob bshad, vol. 1 (ka), p. 59.6.
36lho-pa, pp. 496.3-51a.3.
"Sa-pap, Rje btsun rin po che'l rnam thar, Lam 'bras slobbshad, vol. 1
(ka), p. 289.5; SKKB, vol. 5, p. 148.1.4.
Lho-pa, pp. 500.6 and 501.6. Bu-ston records that Danaslls and
Vibhūticandra stayed a long time in Tibet. See Bu-ston's Chos byung, E.



Oberniller trans. (1931), p. 222.
39 Lho-pa, p. 51a.4.
*Ibad..p. 520.5. He is known to have worked with this pandita in or
before 1208, because in a translation colophon to a work they translated together,
he designates himself as a lay-adherent (dge bsnyen). See the Slob dpon tsandra
gau mili smon lam, Gzhung bahad klog skya ma sogs, vol. 2, pp. 357-362.
41 Lho-pa, p. 510.3.
"Ibid., p. 52a.3. Regarding the question of Sa-pan's later refutation of
some of these teachings, see above, Introduction, note 22, and below, chapter 2,
section (5).
Ibid., p. 515.4: mkhas per sbyangs te zhan la ston par mdzad pa. See
also G. Roerich tr. (1976), p. 195, where Sa-pan is said to have given tantric
instructions to one Jo-'bar in 1214-15.
**Sa-paņ, Rje btsun, Lam 'bras slob bshad, vol. 1 (ka), p. 289.1; SKKB, P.
148.1.1.
* Ibid., Lam 'bras slob bahad, vol. 1 (ka), pp. 252-256.
40 Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs, Rtson 'phro, p. 316.4; [Zhu-chen], Dpal sa,
SKKB, vol. 7, p. 315.3.3.
"'G. Roerich tr. (1976), p. 606. This meeting is described in Dbon-po
Shes-rab-'byung-gnas's biography as having taken place in the fall of 1225 (bye
lo). See the Dgonga gcig yig cha, vol. 1, pp. 113f, which is the work Spyan snga
'brigung aling pa'i rnam thar snyan pa't 'brug agra by 'Bri-gung-pa Ratna.
***Zhang Sreg-shing (together with Samye and Nyang-snad Rgyan-gong) is said
to have been one of the "middling residences" of Sa-pan. His "great residences"
were Sa-skya and Liang-chou. See G. Tucci (1949), p. 680, note 40; A-mes-zhabs,
Dpal rdo rje, vol. 1, p. 357.4.
Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshogs, Rt som "phro, p. 316.5.



SºIbid., p. 316.6. But [Zhu-chen), Dpal se, p. 316.3.3, states that
'Phags-pa accompanied Sa-pan to Skyid-grong in his fourth year (1.e. in 1238).
51 Lho-pa, pp. 565.6-57a.1.
ZYe-shes-rgyal-utshan, Lan 'bras slobbshad, vol. 1 (ka), p. 150a.6.
53 [Zhu-chen], Dpal sa, p. 316.3.4.
*Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, P. 53a.2. On Liang-chou, see J.
Szerb (1980a), p. 273, n. 53, and D. Schuh (1977), p. 75, n. 111.
For the chronology of
Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-royal-mtshan, P. 538.2.
these years see also D. Schuh (1977), pp. 29 and 57.
S See also J. Szerb (1980a), pp. 264f, note 9.
"See 'Phags-pa, Chos rje pa bde bar, pp. 266.4.4-267.2.6. The date of his
death was calculated by D. Schuh to have been the 28th of November, 1251, as cited
by J. Szerb (1980), p. 300, note 69.



的一



Chapter 2
JUG
PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON THE MKHAS
AND OTHER WORKS OF SA-PAN
To date, some forty of Sa-pa's works have been discussed or mentioned in.
modern publications, and nearly twenty have been translated. Most of those al-
ready translated, however, are shorter, minor writings; of his five major works,
only one-the Legs par bshad pa rin po che'i gter--has yet been published in a
complete edition and translation. Nevertheless, all five major treatises have
been at least discussed by modern scholars, and one can expect editions or trans-
lations of several more in the coming decade.
In the following synopsis of previous research, I will begin with the KhJ
and the four other major works. In view of Sa-pan's great importance in many
areas of Tibetan learning, religion and history, I cannot hope to have traced
every last reference to his works. Yet what follows should be enough to show in
some detail how far studies on his writings have progressed until now.
(1) Mkhas pa rnana jug pa'i sgo (TB no. 6)
The first modern scholar to mention the KhJ seems to have been 6. Tucci.
In his Tibetan Painted Scrolls (1949), pp. 101f, this pioneer of Tibetan literary
studies described the KhJ as follows:
The m'as pa rnams ejus poi sgo (in Sanskrit: Vidagdhavatara) is less
strictly dogmatic (than the Thub pa'1 dgongs geal and Gzhung lugs legs
bahad): it is a small treatise on rhetoric and exegesis, and at the
same time it contains a series of precepts on good composition and on
the right understanding of texts. Although the author, mostly in the
second part, often goes into [p. 102) subtle details and argues
technical points, the book is altogether a propedeutic, on the lines of
similar Indian handbooks.
This account requires correction on two points. First of all the KhJ is not a
"small treatise" by any standard, and within Sa-pan's collected works it is the



third longest. Secondly, Tucci overlooked the existence of the third main section
of the work: that on philosophical discussion and debate. I am not sure which
Indian propaedeutic handbooks Tucci had in mind as being similar to the KhJ.
The next mention of the KhJ was by E. Gene Smith, who in his useful intro-
duction to the Bahad mdzod vid bzhin nor bu in its Sata-pitaka Series edition
(1969), p. 6, discussed the KhJ within the general context of Tibetan com-
pendiums:
One of the earliest scholastic compendia is the Mkhas jug of Sa-skya
pandi-ta Kun-dgal-rgyal-mtahan (1182-1251). This work was intended to
serve as a manual for instructing the beginning monk in the concepts
and methods of Mahayana scholarship. It is an introduction to the
three functions of the scholar: teaching, philosophical refutation, and
literary composition. The Mkhas fug was designed primarily for the
full-time religious practitioner, the monk. The Mkhas ug of 'Jam-
ngon 'Ju Mi-pham-phan-rgya-at sho (1846-1912) now shares popularity with
that of Sa-skya pandi-ta. These are the only two examples of the
genre that are well-known.
The compendia of the mkhas jug type differ in one major aspect
from another group which we can call the bsad mdzod and to which our
text (the Bahad mdzod yid bzhin nor bu belongs: whereas mkhas ug are
largely meant for monks, béad odzod are often compiled for pious lay-
men. The purpose of bsad ndzod is to serve as a key or outline to help
the layman understand the often abstruse concepts and categories of
Tibetan Buddhism
While both the Mkhas ug of Sa-pan and Mi-pham are indeed scholastic "compen-
diums" of sorts, neither will serve as an introductory manual for beginning monks.
Both in fact are usually read by scholars who have completed considerable prelimi-
nary studies. But beyond this, and the resemblance of their titles, these two
works are not really very similar at all. The Mchas 'jug of Mi-pham is an outline
of the basic concepts of Mahāyāna Buddhist philosophy, whereas that of Sa-paq
explains the three functions of the scholar: teaching, debating and composition.
The subject matter of Mi-pham's Mkhas jug was commonly dealt with in the standard
scholastic curriculums, while the content of the Mkhas tug of Sa-pan was not
covered in any ordinary course of studies. Because of their great differences in
content as well as in style and presentation, it seems there is nothing to be
gained by calling these and all other?) scholastic compendiums "akhas jug." I
vould prefer to forego the term as the name of a genre and would simply classify



Sa-pan's KhJ as a manual of scholarly methodology and Mi-pham's work as an outline
of Mahayana philosophical concepts.
It is also to Smith's credit ([1970b), p. 1) to have noted the seminal
position of Sa-pan and the Mkhas jug in the development of kavya studies in
Tibet:
"The systematic study of Sanskrit poetics begins in Tibet with Sa-skya
Pandita. ... The Mkchas pa jug pa'i sgo can be regarded as the
first systematic introduction to the poetical figures."
The KhJ of Sa-pan was mentioned in passing by J. E. Bosson (1969), p. 4
R. Canzio (1980), p. 72, note 4; and K. Mimaki (1982a), p. 368, note 18. It was
also touched on by Sh. Bira and O. Sukhbaatar (1979), p. 128, who described it as
"the one of his [1.e. Sa-pap's] philological compositions in which the author,
above all, made an apt and creative comparative study of the Tibetan and Sanskrit
languages similar to modern methods of comparative linguistics (1)."
The next substantial mention was by Steven D. Goodman (1981). In his
article on Mi-phan-rgya-atsho and the latter's Mkhas u pp. 67f, Goodman re-
peats much of what Smith said. But he also mentioned (p. 77, note 2) for the
first time that a commentary on Sa-pan's KhJ existed, referring to the incomplete
commentary by Shakya-mchog-ldan. He also observed that the importance of the KhJ
for later Tibetan studies on kavya and literary composition in particularis
attested by the numerous citations of it in the commentary on the Kavyadarsa by
Khams-sprul IV. In addition, Goodman (ibid.) noted a reference to Sa-paņ's KhJ by
Mi-pham.
More recently, L. van der Kuijp described the KhJ in his book on early
Tibetan epistemological traditions (1983), p. 103:
The [KhJ) ... systematically deals with the methodological guidelines
that govern the three traditional qualities of scholarship of [sic]
composition (rtso-pa), explication ('chad-pa), and debate (rtsod-
pa). It has given rise to [an] entire genre of Tibetan works ....
Thus far two commentaries to this text have been published, and it is
rather likely, that, given the general importance of this work, addi-
tional ones will surface in due time.
He thus specified the three main sections of the KhJ in their actual order, and
referred to more of its commentarial literature, noting the existence of Glo-bo
mkhan-chen's commentary. He also mentioned (p. 306, note 305) a work that is



similar in its subject matter to the KhJ: "A text belonging to the same genre,
though more limited in scope, would be the 'Chad-rtsod- [sic] gaum-gyi roan-gzhag
legs-bshad ayin-byed snang-ba, contained in vol. Kha of the Collected Gsung-'bum
of Bstan-dar Tha-ram of A-lay-sha [sic], New Delhi, 1971; pp. 115-154."
The first study of a specific passage from the KhJ was made by Professor D.
Seyfort Ruegs (1983), P. 231f. In his article on the place of thesis in the
Madhyamaka, he discussed the section where Sa-pap described different types of
disputants who claim to maintain no thesis (III 36-37), including the Madhyamika,
(2) Legs par bshad pa rin po che'i
gter (Lsh) (TB no. 2)
The Legs par bahad pa rin po che'i gter or Legs bshad is probably Sa-pap's
best-known work both inside and outside Tibet. It oves its fame to the universal
appeal of its subject matter: it is a collection of vise and pithy sayings about
what is good and bad in life. Its appeal thus reaches far beyond the Buddhist
hermitages and seminaries of Tibet. Called the Sa skya legs bshad, its verses
were known by heart not only by countless ordinary Tibetans but also by many
Mongolians too, because it was translated into the latter language by the 14th
century and widely disseminated there.
The Legs bshad was one of the earliest native Tibetan works to attract the
attention of Western Tibetologists. Indeed, the great pioneer of Tibetan studies
Alexander Csoma de Körös studied two-hundred and thirty-four of its verses in the
year 1833 in an article entitled "A Brief Notice of the Subhasita Ratna Nidhi of
Saskya Pandita, with Extracts and Translations." The posthumous publication of
this study in 1855/56 was next followed by a French translation in 1858 of a
selection of 134 verses by Ph. E. Foucaux in his le trésor des belles paroles;
choix de sentences composées en tibétain par le lame Saskya Pandita. Then in 1863
and 1865, A. Scheifner translated thirty-three verses into German in his notes to
the first edition of Otto Bühtlingk, Indische Sprüche. Then in 1892-96 G. Huth
presented a German translation of nineteen verses in his Geschichte des Buddhismus
in der Mongolei.
Following those incomplete translations, the first complete text and trans-
lation to be published in the West was the German translation of W. L. Campbell.
This appeared, with transcribed Tibetan text, in 1925 under the title Die Sprüche
von Sakya. 1948 say the publication of the first of several reproductions or
transliterations by L. Ligeti of the work in its pre-classical Mongolian transla-
tion. In 1952 a partial Czech translation by P. Poucha and P. Eisner is said to



have been published in Prague, and in 1958 the Chinese scholar Wang Yao published
a Chinese translation of some two-hundred and twelve verses. R. A. Stein (1972
originally published in French in 1952), pp. 268-270, discussed the style and
origins of these sayings, also comparing similar later Tibetan works.
G. Bethlenfalvy (1965) was the first to study passages from a commentary on
the Lege behad.' E. Gene Smith (1969a), vol. 1, pp. 122€, also gave some details
on the commentary which was begun by Lho-pa kun-ukhyen but corrected and completed
under Sa-pap's supervision by another of his disciples, Dar-ston Chos-rgyal.
Annotated transcriptions of Tibetan and Mongolian texts vith complete English
translations, however, were not published until 1969. These appeared in J. E.
Bosson's A Treasury of Aphoristic Jewels, The Subhigitarat nanidhi of Se Skya
Pandita in Tibetan and Mongolian. The texts Bosson used were a pre-classical
Mongolian translation (published by L. Ligeti in 1948), two recent Tibetan xylo-
graphs, and the Tibetan text found with the earlier Mongolian translation. The
latter text (Bosson's text A) is of great interest since it probably entered
Mongolia by the mid-14th century. But in his "edition" of the Tibetan text and
his translation, Bosson did not always indicate which of the several variant
readings he followed. He also did not have access to any commentary.
In 1973 the Soviet scholar V. S. Dylykova published an article on Sa-pap's
sayings. After that there appeared the article of J. Kolmas (1978), which is a
good introduction to the Legs bahad and the aphorisms of Sa-pay, and which con-
veniently summarizes the modern publications on it. The place of the legs bahad
within the "Greater Indian" tradition of subhasitas can also be better understood
now thanks to the books and articles of the late L. Sternbach: (1973), pp. 224ff;
(1974), p. 40 and note 217; (1980); and (1981). The sources of some of the
verses were treated more recently by M. Hahn (1984), who in his earlier textbook
of classical Tibetan (1974), pp. 216-224 and 239-243, had presented the text of
the first three chapters, together with a brief introduction and textual notes.
Since the mid-1960s a number of other textual and commentarial sources have
become known. In D. Jackson (1983), p. 7, for instance, I described the discovery
of an incomplete 15th-century xylographic edition from Sa-skya. There has also
appeared a recent (1982) Lha-sa typeset edition of the basic text with Dmar-ston's
commentary" (which I hear has already been reprinted in India). Given the great
importance of the work for the two Central Asian countries Tibet and Mongolia, it
would seem worthwhile to bring out a critical edition of the Tibetan text, making
use of the Derge xylographic edition, the extant fragments of the early Sa-skya
edition, the commentaries, and whatever other significant manuscripts and xylo-
graphs are available.



(3) Tshad ma riga pa's ster (RT) (TB no. 19)
The Rige gter (RT) with its long autocommentary Riserter rangerel
(RTRG) (TB no. 20)--Was Sa-pan's great masterpiece on Buddhist Pramana. It has
yet to be thoroughly investigated, though recently it has begun to receive more
attention. The first mention of the Rigs gter that I have located was by Th.
Stcher batsky in his Buddhist logic (1930-32), vol. 2 [which appeared first, 1930).
p. 323, note 4, where he described the work as follows:
Rigs-gter - Nyāya-nidhi, a concise treatise in mnemonic verses of Sa-
skya-pandita Kun-dgab-rgyal-mtshan, held in high esteen by the Tibetans
as their oldest original exposition of Buddhist Epistemology. Copies
of the Lhasa block prints are very rare, no one is available at Lenin-
grad, but a commentary by Rgyal-tshab is found in the Mus. As. Petr..
... According to tradition his work was originally written in
sanscrit.
Here it should be noted that no Lhasa edition of the Rige ster is now known,
though editions from Derge and Sa-skya did exist. Also, the prevailing tradition
is that Sa-pap wrote the work originally in Tibetan, in c. 1219 while staying at
Sa-akya. It is said that the work was subsequently translated into Sanskrit.
In the same volume of Stcherbatsky's work, there is a translation of 'Jan-
dbyangs-bzhad-pa's Blo rigs, the section on mental perception, where Sa-pap's
statements in the Rigs gter are alluded to four times (pp. 323, 325, 327, 330).
Then in volume 1 (1932), pp. 55f, Stcherbatsky gave another description of the
Rige gter:
The classical Tibetan work of this period has been produced by the 5th
grand lane of the Sa-skya territory, the celebrated Sa-sky-pandita
Kunga-gyal-mtshan (sic) (1182-1251). It is a short mneumonic verse
with the author's own commentary. Its title is Tahadma-rigspai-gter
(pramaņa-nyâya-nidhi).
The next scholar to mention the Rigs gter, G. Tucci, also stressed its Importance.
In his sketch of Sa-pay's works within his Tibetan Painted Scrolls (1949), p. 102,
he gave this account:
But the Sa skya Pandita's masterpiece is the book which gained him one
of the foremost places in the history of Lanistic thought, the Ts'ad



ma rigs pal kter, an ample and most accurate exposition of Indian
logic, based on the Pramāpavārttika and on the Pramapaviniscaya by
Dharmakirti, and on their commentaries. This is a fundamental tres-
tise, written in mneumonical verse and accompanied by a commentary.
The Sa skya Pandita had some forerunners in this field, but his work
doomed them to oblivion: they are p'vya pa Clos kyi seh ge (1109-1169)
and gTsah pa brTson agrus sen ge, who also lived in the XIIth century.
One also finds passing references to the Rigs gter in G. Roerich (1976), pp. 808
[originally published in 1953); A. Ferrari et. al. (1958), p. 1
Inaba (1961), p. 4; and J. E. Bosson (1969), p. 4. Of these, Tucci was probably
the only one to have actually seen the Rigs gter; before the publication of the
Sa skya bka' 'bum in 1968 from Tokyo, the Rige ster was quite rare outside Tibet.
Some more details of the place of the Rige ster within Tibetan Pramapa were
given by E. Gene Smith (1970a), and the work was also mentioned by S. Matsumoto
(1978), p. 7, and (1980), notes 2 and 51. The first detailed investigation of the
Rigs gter and its commentaries, however, were undertaken by L. van der Kuijp. He
has studied (1978) Phyva-pa's doctrines in connection with Rigs gter chapter 2.
In another article (1979a), pp. 6f, he touched on the question of Sa-pap's classi-
fication of Tshad ma among the five main fields of knowledge, as reflected in the
Rigs ster. He has also discussed (1979) the apoha theory expounded in chapter 4
of the Rigs gter, and he devoted the third chapter of his published dissertation
(1983) to an investigation of the place of the Rigs gter vithin Tibetan Pramana.
Moreover, van der Kuijp (1979) presented an edition, topical outline, and verse
index to Rigs ster chapter 4. In his dissertation (1983), pp. 85-95, he gave the
same for Rigs gter chapter 8. A short but very useful contribution in the same
work (pp. 104, 107) is a chapter concordance of eight major commentaries on the
Rigs gter,
Some other recent references to the Rigs gter include those of Lati Rinpo-
che and E. Napper (1980), pp. 98 and 125. As L. van der Kuijp pointed out in his
review (1985), they did not trace the cited quotes back to the Rigs gter itself
and did not ascertain whether the quotes represented Sa-pan's own opinion or
merely purvapaksas. L. Zwilling (1981), p. 307, has studied quotations of
Dharmakirti on the two truths found in the Rigs gter, with the aim of under-
standing Sa-paņ's interpretation of Dharmakirti's philosophy (though unfortunately
he took a quote of PVin II 56 to be a second translation of PV III 3). S. Onada
(1981), p. 3, pointed out a topical similarity between the Rigs gter and the order
of classes in the later Dge-lugs-pa bsdus grva curriculum. T. Tillemans (1984)
briefly mentions Sa-pap's account in Rigs gter chapter 11 on answering prasanga



rejoinders in debate. And Z. Horvath (1984) has presented a useful topical out-
line of the complete Rigs gter based on the subject headings of the Rigs gter rang
grel.
Regarding comentaries on the Rigs gter, L. van der Kuijp (1979), p. 410,
listed seven published commentaries and six unpublished ones, the latter group
deriving from the The yig of Shes-rab-rgya-mtsho. In (1983), p. 306, note 308, he
repeated the second list, correcting one mistake and one ontston. D. Jackson
(1983a), pp. 8-12, is a preliminary survey of the commentarial writings of twenty-
four indigenous scholars.
(4) Thub pa'i dgonga pa rab tu gsal ba (ThGs) (TB no. 1)
The Thub pali dgonge geal, an expansive treatise on the practice and theory
of the Bodhisattva's path, has yet to receive the attention it deserves. G.
Tucci (1949), p. 101, in one of the few notices of it remarked:
Sa skya Pandita composed, with great acumen, synthetic expositions of
the Mahāyāna; one of the most remarkable is the t'u (sic) pai dgongs pa
rab tu esal (sic). ... This and other works are nothing more than
handbooks and summaries, in which the Buddha's word and its century
old, traditional commentary are reproduced in the easiest and most
complete manner, without the least contantnation of doctrines not
carefully sifted.
W. D. Shakabpa (1967), p. 63, also briefly described the Thub pali dgonga asal.
According to him:
[Sa-pan after leaving Tibet] sent to his fellow clerics in Tibet a
book he had written. It was titled Thub-pai Gong-sal, meaning "The
Buddha's Intention." Knowing he did not have long to live, he left his
book as a legacy to his country.
L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 102, identified the Tibetan genre to which the Thub
pa't dgons sal may be assigned: "the 'Stages-on-the-Path' literature (lam-rin)."
He added that in it "a number of philosophical and doctrinal issues?] are dis-
cussed and rejected whenever he found them to be incompatible with what he per-
ceived the Indian texts tried to convey."



In D. Jackson (1983a), PP. 4f, there is a brief description of the Thub
pa'i drongersal and a preliminary sketch of the commentaries and secondary 11te-
rature on it. D. Jackson (1983), pp. 6f, contains a description of a xylographic
edition of the work from Sa-skya dated 1439. But until now only two small sec
tions of the work have been discussed or published in translation. Firstly, S.
Matsumoto (1978), p. 8, touched on the classification of the sub-divisions of the
Madhyamaka in the Thub pa'i dgongs gsal and what the work tells us about Sa-pap as
a Madhyamika. Secondly, Roger Jackson (1982) devoted an article to Sa-pap's
treatment of "the council of Tibet" in the Thub pa'i drone saal. I should add
here that in 1983 with the help of the Venerable Khenpo Appey I completed a draft
translation of the complete work, which I hope to annotate and publish in the
future.
(5) Sdom pa gsum svi rab tu dbye ba (DS) (TB no. 24)
The Sdom sun rab dbye is another of Sa-pan's major works that has been
relatively neglected. It is, however, of the greatest importance for under-
standing some of the central doctrinal developments in Tibetan Buddhist Profes-
sor D. Seyfort Ruegs was the first to use the Sdom Bum rabdbye for the light it
sheds on a particular doctrinal problem. In his study of the theory of the
tathāgatagarbha (1969), p. 58, note 5 (see also pp. 9. 142n., and 394), he noted
Sa-pan's view that the existence of the tathāgatagarbha was taught with provi-
sional meaning (drang don neyartha). In the subsequent introduction to his
translation of Bu-ston's treatise on tathāgatagar bha (1973), pp. 31 and 32, note
5, Seyfort Ruegs returned to this topic, pointing out the great influence that sa-
pap's teaching had on Bu-ston and the latter's disciple Sgra-t shad-pa. He also
translated here the relevant passage from the Sdom sum rabdbye and supplied
references to related passages in Bu-ston's and Sgra-tshad-pa's treatises, as well
as to Sa-pan's Indian sources.
Another early Western scholar to notice the importance of the Sdomssum
rab dbye was E. Gene Smith. In his introduction to Kong-sprul's Shes bya kun
khyab (1970), p. 4, he mentioned that works on the subject of the three vows had
"produced some of the most significant indigenous works in Tibetan-Buddhist lite-
rature," citing as his first example the Sdom gsum rab dbye, which he said was
"written largely to refute the dgonge scig heresy of 'Bri-gung Skyob-pa 'Jig-rten-
mgon-po. 13
Some years later S. Karmay (1975), pp. 152€, mentioned the passage in the
Sdom Raum rab dbye which seems to identify certain Mahanudră teachings with the



"Chinese system of Rdzoga-chen." Karmay understood the latter to refer in fact to
the Rdzogs-chen of the Rnying-ma-pa and Bon-po. R. M. Davidson (1981), p. 92, had
the same understanding of this passage. But L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 101 and
note 300, called this interpretation into question. Van der Kuijp (1bid.) also
characterized the Sdom geum rab dbye in general as follows:
The Sdom gsum rab dbye) was composed with the specific aim of coun-
teracting certain forces within Tibetan Buddhism which he perceived to
be not only counterproductive, but indeed detrimental to the efficacy
of Buddhist practice. These tendencies concerned theoretical and prac-
tical problems with the vinaya as per the pratimokga (80-sor thar-pe),
as well as with the Bodhisattva vow, and the specific commitments of
practitioners of the tantras.
In addition, M. Tatz (1982), pp. 5ff, discussed Sa-pan's explanations of the
Bodhisattva's vow in the Sdom gsum rab dbye.
On the Sdom geum rab dbye commentaries and other related works, D. Jackson
(1983a), pp. 12-23, is a preliminary survey of such writings by twenty-eight
Tibetan authors. I have also learned that Jared Rhoton has made the Sdom som rab
dbye the subject of his recent PhD dissertation (1985) at Columbia University.
(6) Rol mo'i bstan bcos (TB no. 4)
Sa-paņ wrote this short but interesting treatise on music, song and prosody
sometime before his full monastic ordination in 1208. Ricardo 0.
discussed some verses of this work, and he also completed a doctoral dissertation
"Sakya Papdita's 'Treatise on Music' and Its Relevance to Present-Day Tibetan
Liturgy" (1978a). In a more recent article (1980) he discussed in detail one
verse with its commentaries. Ter Ellingson has discussed a key section of the
work ((1979), pp. 1188) and has also translated brief passages from it (1979)
(1979b).
(7) Gzhung lugs legs par bshad pa (TB no. 3)
This exposition of philosophical tenets (grub mtha was not in fact com-
posed by Sa-pan, though it was included among his collected works in the Derge
edition and accordingly has been treated as genuine by G. Tucci (1949), p. 101; J.
E. Bosson (1969), p. 4: S. Matsumoto (1978), p. 8; R. Ikeda (1980); and L.



Zwilling (1981), p. 310. Since then its authenticity has been doubted--as by L.
van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 101, 103, and 304, note 295--or it has been fudged an
outright forgery, as by D. Jackson (1984), pp. 77, 90, note 3; D. Jackson (1985);
and L. van der Kuijp (1985a); cf. K. Mimaki (1982), p. 33, note 65.
(8) Bshes pa' phring yix si badus don (TB no. 114)
This work, a topical outline of the Suhrllekha of Nagarjuna, was translated
by L. Kawamura (1975), pp. 108-113, though with some mistakes in the colophon.
This work was also mentioned by Chr. Lindtner (1982), P. 219, note 184. However,
It is a late accretion to Sa-pan's collected works and should not be considered
authentic. See below, chapter 6, note 4.
(9) Bu slob rnams la spring ba (TB no. 77)
This letter, ostensibly written by Sa-paņ near the end of his life after he
had reached the camp of Köden, if genuine is an important document for the study
of early Tibetan-Mongolian relations. It was translated by G. Tucci (1949), pp.
10-12. See also D. Schuh (1977). pp. xvii, 18, 516 and 76, note 125; and J. Szerb
(1980a), p. 264, note 6. Cf. W. D. Shakabpa (1967), pp. 63.
(10) Gangs can sy sgom chen rnama la adams pa (TB no. 76)
A translation of this short collection of admonitory verses was published
by Dan Martin (1980) under the title "Sa-skya Pandita's Advice for Tibetan Conten-
platives." Before this, verses 11-15 had been translated by Nawang Teering
(1979), p. 23.
(11) Zhen pa bzhi bral ayi gdams pa (TB no. 86)
This is a synopsis of the Zhen pa bzhi bral, a Sa-skya-pablo sbyong
teaching that goes back to Sa-chen Kun-dga'-snying-po. The Tibetan text with an
English translation by Thutop Tulku and Ngawang Sonam Tenzin (1968), pp. 20-25,
was published by the Sakya Centre, Rajpur.



(12) Rdo sie theg pa'i rtsa ba dang yan lag
gi dan tshig bshad pa (TB no. 64)
An unreliable translation of this brief explanation of the "root" and
"branch" downfalls of the Vajrayana was published in J. D. Willis (1972), pp. 100-
106.
(13) Skyes bu dam pa rama la spring ba'i. 1 se
(TB no. 30)
Sa-pan wrote this interesting work as an "open letter" explaining and
justifying his previous efforts (in works such as the Sdom geum rab dbye to
rectify what he took to be doctrinal errors on the part of his countrymen. This
work was noticed by A. Vostrikov (1970), p. 25, note 55 (originally written in
1936). It is also accurately described by S. Karmay (1975), pp. 152f, who noted
that it contains an important list of writings attributed to Hwa-shang Mahāyāna.
A translation with transcribed text also exists for this work, rendered by
Madan Mohan Singh (1971). It is completely unsatisfactory. In the same book,
which was entitled Sulekha of Sakya Pandita, one also finds transcriptions and
translations of ten other epistles and minor works by Sa-pan, though unfortunately
of the same quality as the first:
(14) Lang rigs rnan dag dang athun pa's 'chad dros tahul (TB no. 31)
(15) Rtog. Idan rgyan po'i dris lan (TB no. 32)
(16) Rnel phu ba'i zhus Lan (TB no. 33)
(17) Zhang lo tsa ba la gdams pa (TB no. 34)
(18) Batan pa la dga' ba'i lha rnans la spring ba (TB no. 35)
(19) Tshigs su bcad pe gong 'og gnyis (TB no. 36)
(20) Mi nya, g1 rgyal khams su gnang ba'i yi ge (TB no. 37)
(21) Nyt ma la spring ba (TB no. 38)
(22) Sho dgon pa 'gro mgon rin chen la spring ba (TB no. 39)
(23) Sho dgon gyi dge 'dun rnams la spring ba (TB no. 40)
No. (15) in the above list is actually not by Sa-pan, but it is a work ascribed to
his disciple Bi-ji which reached Ngor from Khams in the mid-15th century (cf. TB
nos. 97 and 99). The last two works in the list (22 and 23) are probably apo-
cryphal, as will be explained below.



(24) Lha sa'i bde bar gshega pa
rhams la bstod pa (TB no. 73)
(25) Nga brgyad ma'i 'grel pa (TB no. 18)
Only one verse of the first work listed above has been translated, but it
18 important because the verse is the basis for the second work, the Nga brgyad
ma'i 'grel pa (TB no. 18). The latter is a comment on the above-mentioned verse,
amounting to an autobiographical account of his own studies and scholarly attain-
ments. The basic verse has been translated by L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 103.
The commentary has been cited in the same work, p. 306, note 307.
(26) Bla ma rje btsun chen poli
rnam thar (TB no. 17)
For this, as for the remaining works to be listed, no translation yet
exists. It was simply studied and cited in the course of research, in this case
by Ariane Macdonald (1963), pp. 120f, notes 56 and 57. In this admirable study,
that scholar investigated the chronology of Buddhism proposed by Sa-pap in his
biography of Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan. See also A. Vostrikov (1970), pp.
103.
(27) Phyag ntshan ri mo'i bstod tshis (TB no. 75)
These verses were written by Sa-pap to accompany a symbolic painting he
made on the wall of the courtyard at Samye. They are mentioned in the caption to
an illustration on p. 53 of Chogay Trichen, Thubten Legshay Gyatsho (1979). Some
mistakes in that caption are corrected in D. Jackson (1984a), p. 42.
(28) Sgra la 'jug pa (TB no. 7)
This short work on Sanskrit grammar was analyzed by S. Inaba as early as
1961 in a Japanese article with the English title "Tibetan Philology Pursued by
[Sa] skya Pandita-One of His Many-sided Researches," pp. 5-7. Also studied in
this article were the following:



(29) Særa sgo'i sa bcad (TB no. 8)
(30) Byis pa bde blag tu jug pa'i rnam bahad (TB no. 9)
(31) Yi ge'i sbyor ba (TB no. 10)
(32) Rnam par scad bya 11 ltar sbyor tahul (TB no. 11)
(33) Sngaga ky klog thabs 'bras bu 'byung ba'1 me tos (TB no. 12)
(34) Sgra bye bar badus pa (TB no. 13)
R. A. Miller (1964), p. 74, sought to correct an attribution of the Smrasso to
Sa-paņ by Inaba in an earlier study ([1954), . 31), though Inaba apparently did
not make such an attribution. (See also the reprint in R. A. Miller (1976), p.
59.) In D. Jackson (1983), p. 8, a 15th-century xylographic edition of nos.
(30) and (34) is discussed.
(35)
Sdeb sbyor sna tahogs me tog gi chun po (TB no. 15)
vere briefly
This work on prosody and its sole fragmentary commentary
described in D. Jackson (1983a), pp. 78.
(36) Tshig gi gter. (TB no. 14)
This lexicographical work (based on the Amarakosa) and its only known
commentary vere briefly described in D. Jackson (1983a), p. 7.
(37) Chag lo tsa ba'i zhus lan (TB no. 94)
This important letter written in reply to the questions of Chag lo-tsi-ba
Chos-rje-dpal has been briefly cited by L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 305, note 304.
(38) Bka! Adams do kor ba'i zhus lan (TB no. 79)
This work, a series of answers to the questions of a Bka'-gdams-pa master,
was cited by L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 306, note 309.



(39) Mu stegs kyi ston pa drug btul ba'i
tshiga bcad (TB no. 80)
These verses were written by Sa-pan after his defeating the Indian pandita
Harinanda in debate at Kyirong. They were cited by G. Tucci (1949), p. 680, note
36.
(40) Dri ba'i tshul 'ga' zhig (TB no. 5)
A 15th-century xylographic edition of this short and incomplete work is
discussed in D. Jackson (1983), pp. 98.
(41) Bstan bcos mkhas pa'i kha rayan (TB no. 109)
This is a grammatical treatise ascribed to Sa-pan, and is not the lost
poetical work with the same title. R. A. Miller (1965), p. 330, translated a
quotation from this work by Gser-tog Blo-bzang-tahul-khrims-rgya-ntsho (1845-
1915). (See also R. A. Miller (1976), p. 74.)
(42) [The Game of Rebirth)
This board game of spiritual progress or downfall is believed to have been
devised by Sa-pan for the amusement and edification of his ill mother. The book
of M. Tatz and J. Kent (1977) is an introduction and explanation of the game."



NOTES
See S. Goodman (1981), pp. 68f; L. Kawamura (1981), (1982), and (1983).
*Some Khams-pa scholars used to say that to enter Mi-pham's "Entrance to
Expertise" (mkhas ug) one did not have to be exceptionally learned, whereas one
could not enter the "Entrance for the Wise" (mkhas jus) of Sa-pan unless one was
really learned. (This saying of course involves a pun on mkhas "expert, learned,
wise" and "jug "entrance, enter.")
"If any work deserves to be classed together with Sa-pap's KJ as a manual
of scholarship, it would be this: A-lag-sha Ngag-dbang-bstan-dar, 'Chad rtaod
rtsom sum. See also the manual by Shakya-rin-chen, "Chad nyan la mkho ba't legs
bshad phyin si ma log pa'i stan chos tshul rgya mtsho'i jug ngogs, collected
Works (Thimbu: 1976), vol. 8, pp. 303-450. The latter, however, mainly treats the
same topics as KhJ II.
Since these important publications belong to Mongolian studies, I have not
listed them here. For the full citations of Ligeti's publications, the article of
J. E. Bosson (1961), etc., see J. Kolmad (1978), p. 189, note 2, and L. Sternbach
(1981), pp. 125ff.
As cited by L. Sternbach (1981), p. 125. But is this a mistake for their
translation of the Shes rabadong bu mentioned by J. Kolmas (1978), p. 192, note
10?
As cited by J. Kolmad (1978), p. 191, note 8.
'He studied the commentarial explanations by Dear-ston of the three Pafica-
tantra tales alluded to in verses 87, 149, and 150. This commentary was also used
by M. Hahn (1974) in his notes on the text (pp. 240-243). R. A. Stein (1972)
[French original 1962] had already cited a Sa skya Lega bshad commentary by "Rin-
chien-dpal," though presumably this was Dmar-ston's work. See p. 268, note 3, and
bibliography, no. 164.
As cited by J. Kolmad (1978), p. 203, note 24.



L. Sternbach (1969), PP. 24ff, however, mistook the lere bahad for a
Sanskrit work in Tibetan translation, supposing that Sa-pap was an Indian papdita.
Lege par bshad pa rin po che'i ster dang'grel pg (The Legs bshad with
commentary by Lho-pa revised by Dmar-ston), Lhasa, Bod 1 jonge mi dmanga dpe skrun
khang,
L. van der Kuijp (1985), pp. 37-39.
"Noted as a bibliographical item but not seen is the Ph.D. dissertation of
Bruce C. Stewart (Columbia University, 1983), "A Translation of and Introduction
to the Direct Perception Chapter of Go-rams-pa's Sde bdun ndo dang bcas pa'i
dgonga paphyin cim log par 'grel pa tshad ma rige pa'igter syi don sal bar
byed pa."
'Bri-gung Skyob-pa 'Jig-rten-ngon-po had another teaching called Sdom
asum gnad acis, though I do not know whether it survives. See 'Bri-gung Ratna, p.
116.6
See also the review by G. E. Clarke, The Tibet Journal, vol. 8 (1983),
pp. 55-57. Cf. S. C. Das (1902), p. 260, note, in which the game called "the
circle of 11fe" is apparently the game devised by Sa-pay.



上一



Chapter 3
THE WRITINGS OF SA-PAŅ:
MAJOR WORKS, CHRONOLOGY AND TRANSMISSION
Sa-pap composed a hundred or so works, but most of them were quite short.
Among them, only twenty-six amount to more than five folios in the Derge Sa skya
bka' 'bum (SKKB) edition, and only seventeen come to ten or more follos. His
seventeen longest works are the following:
(1) Rigs gter (RT) and Rigs gter rang 'grel (TB nos. 19 and 20), 220ff.
(2) Thub pali dgong asal (ThGS) (TB no. 1), 99 ff.
(3) Mkhai 'lug (KhJ) (TB nọ. 6), 62 ff.
(4) Sdom geum rab dbye (DS) (TB no. 24), 48 ff.
(5) Dri ma med pa zhes bya ba't rgya cher 'grel pa (TB no. 65), 28 ff.
(6) Legs bahad (Lsh) (TB no. 2), 23 ff.
(7) Sdeb sbyor sna tshogs ne tog gi chun 20 (TB no. 15), 21 ff.
(8) Dbu wa lugs kyi sems bskyed kyi cho ga (TB no. 21), 19 ff.
(9) Phyoga bcu's songs Eryas dang byang chub 08, dpa! rnans la zhubali
'phrin yig (TB no. 29), 15 ff.
(10) Nga brgyad ma'i 'grel pa (TB no. 18), 14 ff.
(11) Byis pa bde blag tu 'jug pa'i raam bahad (TB no. 9), 13ff.
(12) Tshig gi gter (TB no. 14), 13 ff.
(13) Tshogs 'khor cho ga (TB no. 51), 13 ff.
(14) Bla ma Eje btsun chen po' 1 rnam thar (TB no. 17), 12 ff.
(15) Chag lo tsa ba'i zhus lan (TB no. 93), 12 ff.
(16) Sera la ug pa (TB no. 7), 10 ff.
(17) Byang chub kyl sens kyi mchok tu sems bakyed pa'i cho sa'l lungsbyor.
(TB no. 22), 10 ff.
The first thing one notices from this list is that only two works are
concerned primarily with Tantra. One of these (no. 5) is a commentary on the
Rryud gaun la fug pa rin po che'i phreng ba dri ma med pa of Grags-pa-rgyal-
mtshan. Sa-pan wrote most of it at the age of seventeen and completed it at age
twenty. The second Tantric work (no. 13) is a liturgy for the capacakra rite. In
this case Sa-pan seems merely to have revised and clarified an earlier work by
Grags-pa-rgyal-atsban. (Another work of Grags-pa-rgyal-atshan that Sa-pay revised
is the Brtag pa gyis pa't badus don [TB no. 112). It is some 15 foltos long, and



80 1f it is included among Sa-pan's own works it would be no. 9 or 10 in the
list. Thus Sa-pan's longest independent (i.e. non-commentarial) works belonged
to the exoteric branches of Buddhist and literary scholarship.
Sa-pap's general introduction to the theory and practice of Mahayana was
no. 2 in the above 11st, the Thub pa'i dgonga asal (ThGs). It is a detailed
explanation of the stages of practice on the Bodhisattva's path, and it is sa-
pan's second-longest work. Complementing it on the ritual side are nos. 7 and 17,
the first being an explanation of the ritual for imparting the Bodhisattva vow,
and the second a collection of scriptural quotations to be used in conjunction
with that ceremony.
Another major work, this one aimed at the widest possible audience, was his
Legs par bshad pa rin po che'l gter (no. 6). This was his famous collection of
wise sayings expressed in elegant and memorable verses. Several of the other
works on this 11st, however, were intended for a learned readership and had a
clearly polemical or apologetic slant. These include no. 4, his famed Sdom pa
gsum syl rab tu dbye ba, as well as the less-well-known no. 9, Phyogs bcu'1 sangs
rgyas dang byang chub sems dpa! rnams la zhu ba'i 'phrin vis, and even the greater
part of no. 15, Chag lo tsa ba'i zhus lan. The first of this trio is his critical
discussion of various doctrinal problems connected with the three classes of vows
and their related scriptures and practices. The second is a justification of his
earlier polemical activities, ostensibly addressed to all the Buddhas and Bodhi-
sattvas. The third contains further clarifications of some of the same con-
troversial points, here presented in answer to questions from his respected junior
colleague (and disciple?), Chag lo-tsā-ba Chos-rje-dpal. Even no. 10, the Nga
brgyad ma'i 'grel pa, though it is an autobiographical sketch of his own scholarly
attainments, was also written in part to justify and explain himself to both
critics and followers.
Although Sa-pan was thus a Buddhist master who attempted to explain and
clarify the true doctrine, he was also a scholar's scholar. His goal as a young
man was to master the main branches of traditional Indian Buddhist scholarship,
and a number of his major writings are the fruits of this. One of his keenest
interests was in logico-epistemology (Pramāņa). Thus we find that his longest
work (no. 1 above) was the Tshad ma rigs, pali ster with its autocommentary (Riga
gter rang'grel), in which he summarized the logical and epistemological tradi-
tions of Dignaga and Dharmakirti as he had learned them from his Indian masters,
though sometimes being influenced by the advances of the indigenous schools of
Tibetan dialecticians. The other major work that touches on Prania is no. 3,
the Mkhas ug (KhJ)--the main focus of the present study. Its third main section
(amounting to some 20 folios) discusses the rules of formal debate and related



philosophical principles.
The other specialized fields of Indian learning that he cultivated were the
Sanskrit language arts. He devoted part or all of five major works to these. The
KHJ (no. 3), for instance, has three main sections, the first of which discusses
general principles of grammar and prosody and concludes with an account of po-
etics, including a description of rasas and alapkāras. For his treatment of the
latter, he translated parts of Dandin's Kavyādarda. The Sdeb abyor sna tshogs, no.
6, was a more detailed exposition of Sanskrit prosody, based mainly on the metri
cal work of Ratnakarasānti. On the topic of synonymy or lexicography, Sa-pan
wrote no. 12, the Tshig sigter, which was an adaptation and partial translation
of the Amarakosa. He also composed an introduction to gramar, no. 16 Sara la
lug pa, in which he adapted Sanskrit grammar to Tibetan. And his early interest
in grammar is also evinced by no. 11, a commentary on the Byis pa bde blag tulus
pa of his uncle Baod-nams-rtse-mo. Thus he devoted more space in his longest
writings to logical-epistemological, grammatical and literary subjects than to
all other topics combined.
The sole remaining work from the above list is no. 14, his biography of
Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-at shan. It concludes with Sa-pap's chronological calcu
lations, which were the subject of much discussion by later Tibetan historians.
Turning to his shorter writings, one now finds relatively more works on
Tantric subjects. The next nine works in descending order are the following:
(18) Lam zab mo bla ma'i rnal 'byor (TB no. 41), 9ff.
(19) Grub chen bcu (TB no. 47), 8 ff.
(20) Asta'i bzhi bshad (TB no. 50), 8 ff.
(21) Bongo ba yon bshad dang bcas pe (TB no. 100), 8 ff.
(22) Rol mo's batan bcos (TB no. 4), 7 ff.
(23) Gza yum svi mchod chog (TB no. 60), 7 ff.
(24) Skyes bu dan perhans la spring ba'i xi se (TB no. 30), 7 ff.
(25) Lam 'bras bu dang bcas pa't khrid kyi dkar chag (TB no. 54), 6 ff.
(26) Jam dpal svi bstod pa'i rnam bahad (TB no. 74), 6 ff.
No. 21 is a treatise on the dedicatory transfer (paripáman) of merit, no. 22 is
a treatise on music, and no. 24 is an open letter to other Tibetan scholars,
explaining his polemical activities (something like no. 9 above). The last, no.
26, is a commentary on praises of Manjusri composed by Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan.
The remaining five (1.e. nos. 18, 19, 20, 23, and 25) have to do with Tantric
practice.



To sum up by classifying Sa-pan's major works according to literary types,
his most significant works are original treatises on doctrinal or other spe-
cialized topics. These usually consisted of basic mnemonic verses (e.g. in the
Rigs gter, KhJ, Sdom gsum rab dbye, Legs bahad, and Rol mo's), sometimes supple-
mented with a prose autocommentary (Rigs gter, rang. Igrel, KhJ, Nga brgyad). A few
of his treatises consisted partially (KHJ I) or almost entirely (Sdeb sbyor. Tahig.
gter) of close adaptations or translations of sections from basic Indian works.
In addition to such treatises, Sa-pap composed commentaries. Besides his
Just-mentioned autocommentaries, he also wrote comments on works by his uncles
(nos. 5, 11, and 26), and on separate Tantric works (no. 20). Another type of
work he composed was liturgies. These he wrote for use in general Mahāyāna
ceremonies (nos. 8, 17, and 21) or specialized Mantrayana meditations (nos. 13, 18
and 23). In addition, two collections of minor Tantric instructions (nos. 19 and
25) are ascribed to him.
Sa-paq also composed epistles, three of which (nos. 9, 15, and 24) were
long enough to be counted among his twenty-six longest works. He also wrote many
shorter letters. A last type of work he wrote vas biography, of which the only
example is his biography of Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan.
The Chronology of His Works
The composition of a few of Sa-pan's works can be assigned to a definite
year or period because either the colophon refers to the author's age at composi-
tion or the work is directly connected with an otherwise dateable event.
Early Works
Several of Sa-pan's early works specify how old Sa-pan was when he composed
them. If those references are correct, he composed the following when he was
between the ages of seventeen and twenty-two:
1199 Dri ma med pa zhes bya ba'i rgya cher 'grel pa (TB no. 65). He is said (p.
393.1.3) to have completed most of this work in his eighteenth year (1.e. at
age seventeen, 1199):
gzhung 'di dpal ldan sa skya'i den gnas su//
bco brgyad lon tshe kun dga' rgyal mtshan gyis//
lege par sbyer tshe cung zad na rdzogs par//



nyi shu gci, lhag tahe na tshar bar byas//
1200 Bodyul la bangarepa (TB no. 69), p. 396.1.2: blo gros staan
sras kun den Eryal mtahan syis le bou deur lon pa'1. tshe/
bo'1 'khon 10
1202 Gzel yum avi mchod chog (TB no. 60), p. 375.2.5: shakya'1 dge bsnyen kun
dga' rayal mtshan avia lo nyi shu rtsa gyis pa'i tshe sbyar ba'o//
1202 He completed in his twenty-first year the Dri ma med
had begun in 1199.
(TB no. 65) which he
1203 Sgra la tug pa (TB no. 7), p. 116.1.2:
shakya'1 dee banyen kun dga' bryal atshan syis//
nyi shu rtsa gayis lon tshe sbyar ba yin/
1203 Yon tan agrora pa't tshul la bstod pa (TB no. 81), p. 404.4.5: shakya'i dge
bsnyen kun dga' rryal mtshan dpal gyis/ lo nyi shu rtsa enyls lon pa'i tshe
sbyar ba rdzone so//
1204 Byte po bde blog tulus pa't rnam bahad (TB no. 9), P. 122.4.5: chos de
rin po che sa skya pandita chen pos dgung lo nyi shu eta gaum behes pa'l dus
su mdzad pa'o//
1204 Rang gia rang la gros "debe pa (no. 107), p. 428.2.3: kun dgal tayal mtshan
zang pos shing pho byi bali lo gro bzhin zla bali tshe brgyad la bris/
From among these works, the last three deserve special comment. The Rang
gis rang la gros "debs pa, supposedly written in the wood-mouse year (1204), is a
spurious later addition to Sa-pan's bka! 'bum. "The colophon is anachronistic
because Sa-pan had not then received the ordination name of Kun-dga'-rgyal-mtshan-
dpal-bzang-po from Säkyatri. Moreover he was not in the habit of dating his works
in the colophons, and in any case such a work is not listed in any of the pre-
18th-century gsan yigs.
The second work which Sa-pay is said to have written in this year, the Byis
pa bde blas. can be accepted as genuine, but the specification of the year of its
de by Sa-pan. It was added at an undetermined later time by
someone else. It is already found in the Gong-dkar-ba edition of the mid-15th
century. The quotation of the Sanskrit grammatical work Kalapa in it means that
it was in any case probably not written before he began his studies with Sugatasri



in c. 1204.
Finally, the work Yon tan sgrogs pe'i tshul [-tshal?] la bstod pais
suspicious in that the form of the author's name found in the colophon is Kun-
dga'-rgyal-mtshan-dpal. It is possible that he was using the dpal (Ori) to indi-
cate that he was a "glorious" personage, and it is therefore conceivably not an
anachronistic use of the dpal from the dpal bzang po name ending that he received
in 1208. Still, the work deserves a careful investigation.
A few more works can be dated to or before 1208, the year of his full
monastic ordination. If he refers to himself as dge benyen (upāsaka: lay adhe-
rent) in the colophon, this gives a terminus ad quem for dating the work. If he
signs himself just "Kun-dga'-rgyal-mtshan" (instead of "Sa-skya Pandita" or "Kun-
dga'-rgyal-mtshan-dpal-bzang-po"), there is also a good chance that this work
predates his full ordination, though this is less definite: in at least one case
he signs himself "Shakya'i dge-slong Kun-dga'-rgyal-atshan" (TB no. 28, p.
323.2.6).
On the basis of the colophons, then, the following four works can be
counted as "early", i.e. as dating to before the year 1209:
Rolmo'i batan bcos (TB no. 4), p. 80.2.5: shes bya' gnas yonga su grans pa phal
mo che la blos yul du byas pa'l pandita lo azhon yang blo gros gan pa
shakya'i dge bsnyen kun dga' rgyal mtshan ayie rig pa'i 'byung gnas dpal sa
skya'i dgon par sbyar ba'o//
Asta't bzhi bahad (TB no. 50), p. 358.4.3: shakya'i dge banyen kun dga' rgyal
mtshan zhes bya ba sgra rig pa des sbyar ba.
'Jam
dpal syi bstod pa'i rnam bahad (TB no. 74), p. 400.2.6: shakya'i dge bsnyen
brda sprod pa'i et sur lag la ma cmongs pa des mngon par sbyar balo//
Dpal gdong bzhi palt bstod pa (TB no. 84), p. 405.4.1: shakya'1 dge banyen kun
dga' rgyal mtshan gyis sa skya'i dgon par sbyar ba'o/?
The following four should be considered as possibly of early authorship:
Sagags kyi klog thabs "bras bu 'byung ba'i me tog (TB no. 12), p. 125.1.2: lo tsa
ba kun dga' rgyal mtshan syis sbyar ba rdzo 80// (N.B.: This is a very late
and doubtful addition to his collected works.)



Rje btsun rin po che grags pa rryal mtshan syi bstod pe (TB no. 26), p. 322.1.6:
brda sprod pa kun dga' rgyal mtshan syis sbyar bare zhig rdzoge, so// (This
seems to have been written before Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan's death in 1216.)
Sgrub pa lung sbyin (TB no. 44), p. 347.1.3:
gzhan gyis bakul nas kun dga' Eryal at shan gyis//
abyar ba 'di la dam pas bzod par drongs//
Brtag pa gnyie pali badus don (TB no. 112), p. 446.2.3:
la la dag tu kun dga' rgyal mtshan gyis//
ci rigs par ni cung zad spel ba yi//
(This was only a revision of a work by Grags-pa-rgyal-atshan.)
It is interesting to note that some seven out of his twenty-six longest works were
Composed before he reached the age of twenty-seven: nos. 5, 11, 16, 20, 22, 23,
and 26 above (-TB nos. 65, 9, 7, 50, 4, 60, and 74, respectively).
Later Works
The following later works can be dated by internal evidence or through the
connection of the work with a known event:
just
1216 Bla ma rje btsun chen po'i rnam thar (TB no. 17). This was composed
after Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan's death in that year.
c. 1240 Mu stere lyi ston pa drug btul ba'i tshiga bcad (TB no. 80). This was
composed immediately after his defeating Harinanda at debate in Kyirong. The
debate seems to have taken place in about 1240.
1247 Bu slob rhams la spring ba (TB no. 77). This work purports to have been
written soon after Sa-pan met kodin. Thus, if it is genuine, it was written
in early 1247.
One work can be assigned to the period c. 1235-1244 because it was addressed to
Chag lo-tsi-ba Chos-rje-dpal (1197-1264), who did not return from India until c.
1235. This is the Chag lo tsa ba't zhus lan (TB no. 94). Such works as the
following must date to or after the year 1244 since they contain references to the
Mongol invitation:



Bka' gdams do kor ba'i zhus lan (TB no. 79)
Bkal gdans nan mkha! "bum si zhus lan (TB no. 96)
Here one night add that the works attributed to Bi-j1 Rin-chen-graga (TB nos.
32, 97, 99) and any that state that they were revised by 'Phags-pa (TB nos. 96 and
98), 1f genuine, probably date to after 1244.
Finally, one must note that Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs in his Rt som 'phro kha
akong to the Nger chon "byung (p. 316.4-5) posited the dates c. 1219 for the
composition of the Rige ster, c. 1232 for the composition of the Sdom gum rab
dbye, and c. 1240 for the debate with Harinanda. These dates do not contradict
what little 18 otherwise known about the chronology of his mature scholarly
career, and they may be provisionally accepted. However, these datings first
appear only in Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshoga's late-17th-century work, and their ulti-
mate origin is unknown. The date c. 1219 for the Rigs gter also appears in Zhu-
chen Tahul-khrims-rin-chen's Index to the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum (1736), though
for the debate with Harinanda, Zhu-chen errs in the same passage by giving the
date 1232 (thus omitting the date for the Sdom gsun rab dbye). In any case, the
Sdomesum rab dbye most probably was begun before the death of Sa-pap's brother
Zangs-tsha (d. 1239) since the latter is said to have tried unsuccessfully to
dissuade him from finishing it."
The Relative Chronology of Sa-pan's Works
One can also establish a relative chronology for a number of Sa-pap's
writings if one accepts the supposition that any treatise cited or quoted was
composed before the work that cites or quotes it. This is a reasonable supposi-
tion, but it leaves aside the very real possibility that he worked on two or more
works at the same time. The KhJ and Sdeb sbyor, for instance, each refer to the
other. Here the best interpretation is that they were written in
But simply to say so ignores the problem of whether Sa-pap revised his works at
Later times long after their original compositions. He did edit some of his
predecessors' writings, and probably he was tempted to do the same to his own
early works. However, there is no way to know for certain whether he did or did
not do so in a given instance. An unusual case is the Thub pa't donge geal,
which in all extant versions includes a final addendum that purports to have been
added by Sa-pan after he left Central Tibet for the last time in 1244. But the
same addendum states that all his disciples had previously received its reading-
transmission (lung) since he had taught it everywhere in Dbus, Gtsang and Khans.



Thus an earlier version of substantially the same work had to have been composed
prior to 1244; if it had been a different work the lung would have been invalid.
In any case, the following relations and chronologies have been worked out
from the premise that the cited work usually precedes the one citing it. Most of
the dates are highly conjectural.



Figure 1.
Rol moli
c. 1203-
1204?
Byis pa
1204?
*Shes rab
c. 1200-
1203?
Şora la
jus pe
The Relation of Twenty-two of Sa-pap's
Works According to Internal Citations
and References with a Conjectural
Chronology)
*Grub mtha
c. 1214-
- 1219?
Tshig gter
c. 1210-
1220?
Rigs gter
c. 121974
Legs bshad
c. 1215-
1225?
Sdeb sbyor
c. 1220-
1230?
Mkhas jug
c. 1220_
1230?
Chos spyod
c. 1220-
1230?
Sems
bskyed cho.
ga c. 1220-
1230?
Sems
_skyed lung
sbyor c..
1220-1230?
Sdom gaum
rab dbye
c. 1232?
Thub pa'i,
dgongs gsal
c. 1225
- 1235?
Lha sa'i
c. 1225-
12357
Chag lo'i
c. 1235-
1243 Glo bo
c. 1233-
1243
Bla' gdams
c. 1244-
1245?
Phyogs
bcu'i
c. 1233-
1243
Skyes tu
c. 1233-
1243
Nga brgyad
c. 1230-
1240?
A
#
B = A cites B by name
- B = A quotes or alludes to B
lost work
=



The quotations or citations by name indicated in the foregoing chart appeared
the following passages :
in
Work Containing Citation
Work Cited
Byis pa bde blag, p. 117.4.1: Shes rab 'phro be
p. 121.1.6: Rol mo'i batan bcos
Sgra la
fug pa, p. 115.4.6: Shes rab 'phro ba (it is described as "composed
earlier" (sagar sbyar ba])
Riga gter, p. 172.2.1: Grub mtha' rnam 'byed
Sdeo sbyor, P.132.2.5 and 140.3.5: KhJ
p. 133.2.5: Legs bshad
Thub pa'i dgongs gsal, . 5.3.5: Sens bskyed kyi cho ga
p. 8.3.6: Chos spyod bcu pa
p. 13.1.3: Legs bshad
p. 24.4.3: Rigs gter
p. 24.4.3: Grub mtha'i dbye ba
KhJ, p. 89.3.2: Sdeb abyor
P. 96.1.1: "sgra'i bstan bcos"
p. 98.2.6: Legs bshad (verse 7)
p. 98.4.5: Tshig sigter
p. 107.2.2: Grub mthal roam "byed
p. 109.4.5: Rigs gter
Nga brgyad ma'i 'grel pa, p. 148.4.4: KhJ ("sgra'i batan bcos bod la nye bar mkho
ba tsam zhi,"
p. 149.1.2: Rigs gter
p. 149.2.5: Grub mtha'i rnam 'byed
p. 149.3.4: Sdeb sbyor
p. 149.4.4: Mkhas pa'i kha rgyan
p. 150.1.2: Rol mo' bstan bcos
p. 150.3.3: Tshig gi gter
p. 150.4.4: Sku gzuga kyi batan bcos (not shown in chart)



P. 150.4.4: Sa brtag pa (not shown in chart)
P. 151,1.3: Yan lag brgyad pa'i don bsdus (not shown in chart)
Sems bskyed kyi cho sa, p. 273.1.3: Sens bskyed lung sbyor
Chag lo'i zhu ba, p. 408,2.4: Sdom gsum rab dbye
Glo bo lo tsā ba'i zhus lan, p. 415.1.6: Sdom gsum rab dbye
Bkal gdams pa nam mkha! "bum ayi zhus lan, p. 416.5: Sdom gsum rab dbye.
From the above lists and chronology (however approximate), one can discern
three stages in Sa-pan's literary career in Tibet:
(I) Earliest Writings. (c. 1199-1204). At this time his main interests
were the exegesis of Tantric treatises, and language or grammar. His main
sources were his uncles' writings and the teachings and explanations he
received from Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan.
(II) The Rig gnas Period (c. 1205-1225?). At this time his predominant
interests were the branches of scholarship (cig gnas such as Pramāņa, San-
skrit grammar, and the various Sanskrit language arts, including metrics,
lexicography or synonyay, and poetical figures. His principal teachers for
these subjects were Indian panditas (especially from 1204-1213) and his main
sources were the Indian works he read in Sanskrit.
(III) Writings on Mahāyāna Doctrine and Practice (c. 1225-1244). By
this time he was a famous master who attracted large assemblies of disciples
wherever he went. To these public assemblies he taught the general Maha-
yana doctrines and practices, and he composed his own manuals for these. He
also became keenly involved in doctrinal issues.
However, one need not contrast these stages too sharply because there are threads
of continuity running through them. His early interest in language and grammar,
later developed into his intensive studies of Sanskrit language and
poetry. In his writings on Pramana and the literary arts he makes plain that his
main aim is to rectify the errors and ignorance of his contemporaries, and this
stance of the staunch crusader against ignorant error later manifests in his



polemical writings. Only his early work as a Tantric exegete had no sequel in his
later writings, though as a teacher he continued to expound these doctrines.
There was, however, a conscious reason for this. At some point Sa-pap decided
that it would be best not to write his own Tantric treatises but that he should
encourage the circulation of the early Sa-skya founders' works on these subjects
by editing and promulgating them.
Traditional Classifications
of Sa-pap's Greatest Works
As might be expected, Sa-pap's most influential works for later generations
came from the last two periods of his career. The three works with the greatest
impact were among his longest works, and according to the Venerable Dezhung Rinpo-
che these three were considered indispensable for the Sa-akya-pa order in general,
being called the "Three Treatises of the Sa-skya-pa Tradition" (se luge kyi batan
bcos rnam gsum):
(1) Sdom sum rab dbye
(2) Rigs gter
(3) Thub pa'i dgonge sal
In addition there was another traditional classification of his four greatest
works. According to the dge-bshes Bkra-shis-ram-rgyal from Sa-skya, these were
known as the "Four (Doctrinal] Statements of Sa-pan" (sa pap ayi bka! bzhi):
(1) The Tahad me rigs kter, a discrimination of what is and is not logically
acceptable (rige dang rigs min rnam 'byed tshad ma rigs eter
(2) The Sdom Raum rab dbye, a discrimination of what is and is not (true)
Dharma (chos dang chos min rnam 'byed sdom geum rab dbye
(3) The Lege par bahad pa rin po che'i gter, [an excellent, elegant expres-
sion) of what does and does not accord with good worldly custom C118 rten
tshul lugs, athun dang minthun Legs par bshad pa rin po che'i kter
(4) The Elucidation of the Muni's Intent (thub pal. dronge pa rab tu asal ba
This second list is thus the same as the first except that the Lege behad has been
added to bring the total to four. The Legs bshad also appears (along with the
Rige gter in yet another grouping if his major works. These were his so-called
"Three Treasures" (gter gsm:
(1) Tshad ma rigs pa'i gter
(2) Lege par bshad pa rin po che'i gter



(3) Tshig gi gter
All three belong to the middle period of his writings. This classification into
"Three Treasures," however, appears to be attested only in the writings of the
later Dge-lugs-pa scholar Klong-rdol bla-ma." It seems to be unknown to modern
Sa-sky-pas, and I have not come across it in the writings of the tradition.
The KhJ was thus not counted among Sa-pan's greatest works in the tradi-
tional 11ste. From many points of view, however, it was one of his greatest
treatises. It was his third longest work. He wrote it at the end of his rig gnas
period and at the beginning of his doctrinal period; he was at the peak of his
powers. (Shakya-uchog-Idan does in fact list it together with the Sdom geum rab
dbye and Phyoga bcu as one of his exemplary polemical works, though this element
in no way predominates in it.)" Yet it never gained the readership and attention
that the Sdom gum rab dbye, Rigs gter, and Lers bahad did, probably because the
subject matter was too specialized and difficult. It was not an essential work
for ordinary scholastic students, and it could be understood and appreciated only
by advanced scholars.
The Collection and Transmission
of Sa-pap's Works
The history of how Sa-pap's works were collected and then transmitted down
to the present is nowhere told directly in the sources. Instead, it must be
pieced together from scattered hints and stray references. Most of the later
references have to do with Sa-pan's works as one of five main sections of a
greater collection, the Sa skya bka' 'bum. Before the mid-14th century, however,
this fivefold collection did not exist, and Sa-pan's oeuvre existed either inde-
pendently or together with that of "Phags-pa. His most famous works such as the
Rige ster, Sdom geum rabdbye and Legs bshad also circulated from the earliest
period as separate books, and there existed individual xylographic editions of
some of them from the 14th century onward. But very few facts are known about the
transmission of individual works; one must begin by tracing what little can be
found out about the history of his writings in collected form.
The Compilation of His Collected Works
The first compilation of Sa-pap's works probably dated to c. 1244-1251. At
some time near the end of his life, Sa-pan must have gathered together all his



available works and formally read them to 'Phage-pa. If he had not done 80,
Phags-pa would not have been able to pass on the lung of Sa-pa's works as the
tradition unanimously says he did. This first compilation may have been limited
to the works Sa-pan brought with him to Liang-chou in 1244-1246, and this may
account for the fact that some important works were omitted from all known later
compilations of his works. Sa-paņ's works were the first of the Sa-skya founders
oeuvres to have been formally compiled. The works of the first three founders had
to wait until the mid-14th century when they were systematically gathered by Bla-
ma-dan-pa Bsod-nams-rgyal-utshan and his assistants." By contrast, the works of
Sa-pan's successor "Phags-pa seem to have been carefully assembled during his
11fetime as a matter of course.
Early Manuscripts
The works of Sa-pap originally circulated only in manuscript. The printing
of books from blocks was not yet introduced into Tibet during his lifetime and
therefore each and every copy of his works that his contemporaries read had to
have been produced by a scribe through laborious hand-copying. Copies of his
books were hard to come by in some places, and those that did exist sometimes left
much to be desired for accuracy. We find Chag lo-tsä-ba Chos-rje-dpal, for in-
stance, writing to Sa-pap telling him about the difficulties he experienced
finding a copy of the Sdom geum rab dbye and relating how when he finally could
borrow a copy for a short while, the one he located was marred with scribal errors
(rig mkhan skyon chage). He concluded his letter with a request that Sa-pan send
him a correct copy (dpe dag pa zhig). Probably the average quality of a manu-
script was somewhat better for those treatises that were less videly read and were
not at the center of any burning doctrinal controversy. His technical treat1.es
and minor writings would have circulated less frequently apart from his collected
works, and any separate copies made were probably more painstakingly done since
they would have been intended for an individual scholar's use.
The earliest manuscript collection of Sa-pap's works that is mentioned in
later sources was commissioned by Sga A-gnyan-dam-pa, a monk-official from Khams
who was a disciple of Sa-pay and Phags-pa. Zhu-chen Tshul-krim-rin-chen de-
scribed this manuscript in 1736 as follows:
From Rga (sic) [there was a set of the collected works of the chos re
[Sa-pap) and his nephew ('Phags-pa) which had been commissioned as a
devotional object by A-gnyan-dam-pa. These were six large volumes



written in gold and silver letters and crafted from exquisite ma-
terials.
According to the Venerable Dezhung Rinpoche, A-gnyan-dam-pa met both Sa-paņ and
Phags-pa when they were passing through Khams in 1244-45. A-gnyan-dam-pa 19 said
to have been appointed the political administrator for all eastern Tibet under
'Phags-pa, and he was the latter's disciple in some moron po lineages. This
manuscript of the two masters' works was perhaps executed about the time of
"Phags-pa's death in 1280, or soon thereafter, but could not have been made much
before that time because 'Phags-pa's complete works would not have been compiled
by then.
One can surmise that this earliest known manuscript of Sa-pap's works was
not radically different in contents from the works as they are now accessible in
the 1736 Derge edition. Certainly it did not contain any new or othervise inac-
cessible major works, for Zhu-chen and his associates could have been relied upon
to include these in the new printed edition.
Another very early set of Sa-pan's works that still existed in the late-
15th or early-16th century was a manuscript written with golden letters on Chinese
paper and kept at Sa-akya in the Gzhi-thog bla-brang. According to Glo-bo mkhan-
chen's description, it was executed in about the period of 'Phage-pa. Glo-bo
mkhan-chen refers to it as one of the earliest textual authorities when discussing
the status of two minor works ascribed to Sa-pap. He also speaks of the
existence of "many old collections of (Sa-pan's] works," and one hopes that some
of these old sets still survive in the Sa-skya Lha-khang-chen-mo.
The Inclusion of So-pap's Oeuvre into the Sa skya bka! 'bum
As mentioned above, when Sa-pan's works were first compiled there did not
exista Sa skya bka' 'bum consisting of his three predecessors' writings because
these had not yet been systematically compiled. Thus the collected works of Sa-
pan circulated Independently of the early three founders' works for a century or
nore. But after the mid-14th-century compilation of the first three founders'
writings, it was only a matter of time before the works of Sa-pag and 'Phags-pa
were added to them to form a single, inclusive Sa akya bka' 'bum. By the late-
14th century the lung for all five masters' works had been gathered together by
single teachers, and those teachers began to give all five lungs together. In the
early-15th century, the Sa skya bka' 'bum as composed of only the first three
founders' works was sometimes still considered to be a separate and distinct



collection. This is indicated for instance by an index preserved among the
writings of Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po (1382-1456).“ But there also existed an
urge to consolidate. By the early-15th century, sets of all five founders' works
vere commissioned together, and by the late-15th or early-16th century one finds
Glo-bo mkhan-chen stating unequivocally that the term Sa skya bka! "bum signifies
the collected works of all five Sa-skya founders."
The Earliest Printed Edition
Though a complete printed edition of Sa-paņ's works had to wait for some
time, at least two of his major treatises seem to have been printed in the early-
or mid-14th century. These were the so-called "Mongolian xylographs" (hor parma
of the Rige gter and Sdom geum rab dbye. During the late-13th and first half of
the 14th century a number of Tibetan works were carved onto printing blocks under
Mongol patronage in China--no doubt by Chinese carvers. Such "Mongolian" edi-
tions of the Rigs gter and Sdom goue rab dbye were later referred to as authorita
tive by the 15th-century Sa-skys-pa scholars Go-rama-pa and Shakya-nchog-Idan.
The former referred to the hor par, ma edition of the Risegter rangerel in his
two Riga gter commentaries, and the latter is said to have approved of a commen-
tary on the Sdom gaum rab dbye by Las-chen Gzhon-nu-seng-ge which consisted of
explanatory words added to the "Mongolian edition" (rab dbye'1 gzhung hor spar ma
nyid la 'bru gnan pa).
25
A few copies of the hor par ma probably survived in Tibet down to the
present century. I was told separately by dge-bshes Shes-rab-'od-zer and dge-
bshes Tshul-khrims-rgyal-utshan of 'Phan-yul Nalendra monastery that an old print
of the Rigs gter rang'grel existed up to 1959 in the Rgyal-mo-rong kham-tshan of
Nalendra. It was printed on doubled sheets of Chinese paper and was believed to
have come from China. The pages were long and the Tibetan characters were large
and angular. This was probably the "Mongolian edition. There is also good
reason to believe that at least one copy of this edition still exists. A xylo-
graph of the Rise gter answering this description with pagination in Chinese
characters is now preserved in the library of the Sa-skya Lha-khang-chen-mo.
The 1439 Sa-skya Xylograph Edition
The printing of books in Tibet itself began in a big way only in the first
decades of the 15th century. The early decades of the 1400s saw, for example, the



carving of the blocks of the "Old Dga'-1dan Edition" (dga' ldan par rnying) of
many of Tsong-kha-pa's works. By the fourth decade of that century, works of
Sa-pap were also being printed. Two of his works published during this period
were the Thub pa'1 dgonge geal and Legs bshad, and blocks of the first were carved
at Sa-skya in 1439. In this edition, the Thub pa'1 dgongs 880l is 83 folios long
with seven lines of text per side. On the right and left edges of the printed
portion of folio 1 verso there are columns of "Mongolian-style" (actually 'Phags-
pa style) Tibetan characters (hor yig). The folios also possess a left-hand
marginal notation of ta and an uncarved blank space, which indicate that the book
formed a fascicle of part 9 of a larger collection.
The xylographie colophon at the end of this book states that the blocks
were carved in the don grub (usa lug) year, which must have been 1439 because the
work was printed after the death of Ta-dben gu-shri Gzhi-thog-pa Blo-gros-rgyal-
mtahan-dpal-bzang-po (1366-1420), a member of the Gzhi-thog branch of the Sa-skya
"Khon family. The blocks were carved at Lhun-grub-dge-'phel, a retreat near Sa-
skya. The patron of the carving was the son of the above, Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug
(1418-1462), and the project was dedicated to his father, who had died when Kun-
dga'-dbang-phyug was only two years old.
The second work by Sa-paņ printed from old Sa-skya blocks is the Legs
bahad, though unfortunately a complete copy is not known to survive. An incon-
plete copy is preserved at the Bihar Research Society, Patna. It originally con-
sisted of nineteen folios of seven lines of text per side, of which ff. 1-6 are
now missing. The pagination is indicated in the margin both in script and in
Tibetan numerals, and there is no xylographic colophon.
This print of the Lege bshad can be seen to belong to the same edition as
the Thub pa'i dgongegaal because it too has the marginal notation ta and it is of
similar size and appearance. This notation marks them both as belonging to part 9
of a larger collection--perhaps an early arrangement of the Sa skya bka! 'bum in
which Sa-pan's works comprised at least volumes 9 and 10. It is not presently
known, however, whether other works of Sa-pap or of the other founders were also
published at this time.
The Gong-dkar-ba Edition (c. 1455)
A second 15th-century printed edition of some (or all) of Sa-pap's works
was prepared at the orders of Gong-dkar-rdo-rje-gdan-pa Kun-dgal-rnam-rgyal (1432-
1496). This was apparently envisaged as a part of a complete Sa skya bka' 'bum
edition, though so far no more than twelve works by three founding masters--Slob-



dpon Bsod-name-rtse-mo, Rje-btsun Graga-pa-rgyal-mtshan, and Sa-pan-are definite-
ly known to have been printed then, At present only five works of Sa-panare
known to survive as xylographs from this edition or as manuscripts derived from
it:
(1) Rol bo'i bstan bcos
(2) Ji Itar dri tabul. (=Dri ba'i tshul sal shie, TB no. 5)
(3) Mkhas pa Crnams jug pa'i ago
(4) Sgra nye bar badus pa'i tahigs su bead pa
(5) Byis pa bde blas tu jug pa'i raam par bahad pa byis pa la phan pa
The first two survive in an original xylographic print that is now kept in the
Sakya College library, Rajpur. Together this pair amounts to only six folios in
this edition, with seven lines of text per page. No marginal notation was carved
for this fascicle, though a small area of wood was left uncarved for later use.
The print came to India from the village of Rong-stod near the Indian border in
Guge district.
Complete prints of one of the last three are not known to survive, but the
textual tradition is preserved in a manuscript deriving from this edition. This
is shown by a xylographic colophon which was retained at the end of the final
work. The surviving manuscript was found at Pha-jo-lding monastery in Bhutan (the
same place where the unique set of Shakya-mchor-ldan's collected writings was
preserved), and it was reproduced in 1979 and published from Thimphu. In this
manuscript, all three works also retain the marginal notation na ca, marking it
as the fifth fascicle of the fourth sain section (Sa-pap's oeuvre) of the Sa skya
bka' 'bum.
The first pair of works was probably carved onto blocks before 1458 because
the name of its patron, Gong-dkar-ba, given in the colophon was his lay name Grva-
Inga-rgyal-po. The last three works would at first sight seem to have been carved
in or after 1458 because their xylographic colophon contains his ordained name
Kun-dgal-nam-rgyal-dpal-bzang-po, which he received in 1458. But recently in Sa-
skya I chanced upon a fragment of the original xylograph of this fascicle (nga ca)
which included the last page of the KhJ (f. 46a) and the whole of the next two
works, ending with the printing colophon to this fascicle. There the patron's
name is given not as Kun-dga'-ran-rgyal but as Grva-inga. Probably the name Kun-
dgal-ram-rgyal in the manuscript had been substituted for Grwa-Inga by a later
Scribe, 29



The Derge Edition
After the printing of the Gong-dkar-ba edition, no major edition of Sa-
pay's works is known to have been produced for almost three centuries. By the end
of this period the Gong-dkar-ba prints had become scarce. Complete sets--if such
sets indeed ever existed--no longer circulated in early-18th-century Khams, though
prints of separate works could still be located. One may conclude that the old
blocks were then no longer in common use.
Perhaps by then the Gong-dkar-ba blocks had been destroyed by warfare, fire
or some other calamity. Or perhaps they had become so badly worn that they were
no longer usable. One may even speculate that the blocks survived in good condi-
tion, only to be put under seal for sectarian reasons. In any case it is beyond
doubt that by the 1730s the need for a new printed edition was greatly felt,
especially in eastern Tibet where the earlier editions probably had not circulated
as widely in the first place. The Derge edition was produced to fill this need.
The Derge edition of the Sa skya bka' 'bum--and hence of Sa-pan's works
vas carved at Derge in the mid-1730s under the patronage of the great ruler and
patron Batan-pa-tshe-ring and at the urgent request of the Ngor mkhan-po Bkra-
shis-lhun-grub. It was executed between two other monumental publication projects
of this ruler: the already completed Derge Kanjur and the soon-to-be-commissioned
Derge Tanjur.
Though the Sa skya bka' 'bum was much smaller than either of those collec-
tions, it was still an ambitious undertaking. It entailed the editing and carving
of some nine-thousand long-page format (ldeb ring) printing blocks to produce a
total of fifteen large volumes. The workers involved in the work were divided
into three main groups: general administrators, editorial staff, and those in-
volved in block carving. Head of the editorial staff vas Zhu-chen Tshul-khrins-
rin-chen, the future editor of the Derge Tanjur.
In this edition, Sa-pan's works came to three physical volumes which con
sisted of a total of 906 folios and required just over 1,800 blocks to print.
For establishing the text of Sa-pap's works, the editors had seven complete manu
scripts to compare." In addition, for some works they may have consulted an
incomplete manuscript of the Sa skya bka' 'bum and stray prints from the Gong-
dkar-ba edition. In general the editors seem to have set the most store by &
"very correct" manuscript of the complete Sa skya bka' 'bum from Skyor-ada' Bsan-
gling dgon-pa in Chab-mdo. Among the seven accessible manuscripts there was also
the old gold- and silver-lettered manuscript believed to have been commissioned in
the late-13th century by Sga A-gayan-dan-pa.



The Derge editors were rather liberal in accepting as genuine a number of
questionable and obscure works ascribed to Sa-pan. They cannot be blamed much for
including works that already appeared in 16th- and 17th-century lists of Sa-pap's
works, but they also approved a number of works that seem to be listed nowhere
else and that are surely apocryphal. One possible reason for this acceptance was
simply that those works had already made their way into one or more of the seven
available manuscript sets. However, the consequence of including these into the
Derge edition was great. These xylographs became the standard edition of Sa-pan's
works. For later scholars, both Tibetan and foreign, each and every work included
therein gained an aura of legitimacy that may or may not have been truly deserved.



NOTES
See below, chapter 6, note 1.
See also below, chapter 4, Doubtful and Spurious Works, and chapter 5.
note 59.
Cf. L. van der Kuijp
On this date see also below, chapter 5, note 22.
(1984), p. 46.
*[Zhu-chen), Dpal sa, p. 315.2.2.
This is related for instance by Go-rams-pa, Sdom pa geum ... rnam bahad,
Pp. 130.1.4 (ta 23a = 22a).
"The references to the KhJ in the Sdeb sbyor (pp. 132.2.5 and 140.3.5),
however, seem to indicate that the KhJ by then was already completed: khobos
mikhas pa rnams fug pa'i sgor bshad zin. Cf. L. van der Kuijp (1984), pp. 46€.
Thus, p. 50.1.6 (tha 99a.6): tahogs chos 'di dbus gt sang khams som du
ngas thams cad la bahad pa yin pas/ nga'i slob na thams cad kyis lung thob peyin
pas . ge Idi la Itos la shod// 'di bzhin nyams su long//
Nga brgyad ma'i, p. 151.3.3 (tha 305b.3): 'di deg la yang dul ba dang/
mngon padang/ shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa la sors pa kho bos byas pa't
batan bon drige pa yang yod la/ rdo rje theg pa lalang spyi dang bye brag si
batan bcos si rige pa byed 'dod pa yod mod kyid on kyang bla mi gong m de dag
&gsung rab la boga dbyung gyu ma mthong bas bstan bcos phra mo tsam mu stoga pa
lusyonge su rdzogs pa'i bstan bcos sngon chad kho bos ma badebs so//
Personal Communication. Ngag-dbang-bsod-nans-rgyal-mtshan, Sdon Pagsum,
p. 55.6, states something that was for Sa-sky-pa scholars self-evident, namely,
that the two greatest works of Sa-pan were his Sdomssum rab dbye and Tshad me
rige pa'l ster: bdag byid chen po'i gsung rab kyi gtso bo adom rigl) gyis.
10 Personal Communication.



"Klong-rdol bla-ma, Collected Works (Mussoorie, 1963), (pha). p. 363. See
also E. G. Smith (1970a), p. 6.
Shakya-chog-Idan, Chos kyi 'khor, p. 467.1. In the KhJ (III 41, auto-
Commentary), Sa-paņ does state the principle that doctrinal errors should be
appropriately refuted because if they are allowed to spread unhindered they will
harn the doctrine, just as rank weeds will crowd out and choke the crops in a
field. "For even 16 passionate and angry fools do not understand, it will be
understood by learned men who dwell in rectitude."
"In particular, any topics that required a knowledge of Sanskrit grammar
or vocabulary (such as in KhJ I and II) were understood by progressively fever and
fever scholars as Sanskrit studies declined with the passing centuries.
See D. Jackson (1983), pp. 4. H. E. Richardson (1983), p. 263, states
that Dpal-1dan-seng-ge died in 1342. If true, the compilation project began
sometime after that. For an earlier sketch of the arrangement and origins of the
SKKB, see E. Gene Smith (1969), p. 81.
D. Jackson (1983), P. 5. A11 teaching and study of Sa-pan's works de-
pended on written texts. Even when texts were memorized or taught from memory,
they were originally learned by reading texts. For a reference to a 15th-century
scholar who had memorized the whole Sa skya bka' 'bum, see Shakya-rin-chen, Col-
lected Works, vol. 4. p. 269.3.
Chag lo'i zhu ba, (TB no. 93), p. 408.2.4 (na 228a.4).
"[Zhu-chen). Dpal s P. 341.2.4: rga nas a gayan dan pali thuga dam du
bzhenge pa'i chos rte khu dbon gyi bka' 'bus gser dngul las grub cing/bzorryu
khyad du 'phaga pa'i cho chen Rlegs ban drug/.
"The Venerable Dezhung Rinpoche, personal communication. See also his Bod
1 fongs ndo khang sa Idan skyur gsum svi byung tshul nyung badus tam axis bon,
pp. 25, 34, 40. On pp. 408 he gives the following account, based on the writings
of Zhu-chen Tshul-Ihrim-rin-chen: sngar dus sa skya pas bod chol kha gaum la
dbang bagyur boli skabs sa a gnyan dam pa kun dga' grase, de nyid chos cie khu
dbon gnyie ka'i zhal slob dang/ bla chen 'phags pa't bla chen du 'khod/ reva nas
royal pos a gnyan dan pala asa dang/ tham ka phul/ mchod, yon bka! gros
kyis/ mdo khang stod phal che ba'i dpon du bskos te/ A gnyan pon tahang la/



sa pas eser khral/ ldan mas "bru khral/gling gis drel khral byas pas bal khral
soga 'jal dros dang/ lugs enyis kyi edzad pa sya ches bas ndo stod kyi dgonsde
rnams skyongs/ ha kyang 'du "dzi rnam 2.yeng che bas/ a gayan dam pa thuga oral
du gyur pas/ lo shas nas rang gnas khri 'du'i nye skor tsam dbang cha lasszhan
sa skya pa la brtsi 'bul dgongs [p. 41] yangs zhus/ sa skya pas kyang de bzhin
gnang mdzad ces zhu chen bka! "bum @ nang Itor chossde dgon gyi lha khangal
dkar chag nang du gsal/. The reference here is to Zhu-chen, Chossde'i, pp. 212.1
and 214.2.
Sga A-gnyan dam-pa is said to have been alive when Buang-po-dpal returned
to Sa-skya from China (1296). See the life of Bzang-po-dpal in A-mes-zhabs,
"Dzam-gling, as excerpted in Khetsun Sangpo, Biographical Dictionary, vol. 10, p.
257. Zhu-chen, Dpal Idan, vol. 2, pp. 206.4, 218.6 and 219.5 identifies A-gnyan-
dan-pa (another spelling: Rgwa Ā nan dam pa) as Dant-pa Kun-dga'-grags, and lists
three lineages in which he appears. On other manuscripts attributed to the
patronage of "A-gnyen bakshi," see H. Eimer's article on the editions of the
Kanjur (1983), notes 30 and Bl. For other references see also Y. Fukuda and Y.
Ishihama (1986), p. 35.
**G10-bo mkhan-chen, Rab 'byams blo gros rab sal gyis dris pa'i Lan (TB
manuscript). vol. cha, p. 2002,3-4: sa skya' bla brang bzhi thox na yod pa'i. 80
pangyi bka bum rgya shox la bris pa'i gser ma/chos kys raval po page
tsam gyi dus su byung ba gcig yod pa/.
Ibid.: gzhan yang bka 'bum roying pamang po'i nang du bcug yod cing/.
21Ngor-chen, Rfe btsun sa skya pa'i bka! bum gyl. dkar chag, SKKB, vol. 10,
p. 366.4.4.
"Glo-bo mkhan-chen, Skyes Itsa bla sas (New Delhi ed.), p. 304.2: bla sa
sa skya pa chen po nas bla ma phags pa'i bar svi. gsung rab nams la sa skya bka!
'bum zhes yonga su graga pa'i mtahan svirnam grangs. See also A-mes-zhabs. Dzam
gling, p. 417, where it is recorded that Theg-chen chos-rje (1349-1425) commi.s-
sioned a set of the collected works of the five founders (rong ma Inga't bka!
"bum)
23. Jackson (1983), pp. 5.
24Go-rans-pa, Sde bdun mde, vol. 2, p. 665.5 (kha 1419.5), and Tshad ma
rigs, vol. 3, p. 651.6 ( 3260.6).



**Referred to by Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas (Thimbu ed.), P. 258.
See also L. van der Kuijp (1983), P. 19, and Shākya-achog-ldan, Tshad ma rigs
gter ... dgongs, vol. 1, pp. 373.7-374.1: hor par du rkos pa cig ni shin tu ma
dax pas dor bar bya.
I have seen a few old Dga'-ldan prints in Nepal and have gathered
references to others. These are described in an article forthcoming in the T. V.
Wylie memorial volume.
“For this colophon, see D. Jackson (1983), p. 17. Correct "14th-century"
to "15th-century."
For more details on this edition, see D. Jackson (1983), pp. 7-16.
29 See below, chapter 10.
30 The blocks for this edition may have survived until recent times at Pede
Dzong near Yamdrok Tsho. See D. Jackson (1983), p. 16.
These manuscripts--and the Derge edition which grew from them-are des-
cribed in more detail below in chapter 10.
The Gong-dkar-ba prints strangely enough are not mentioned in
index ([Zhu-chen), Dpal ), but only in Zhu-chen's autobiography.
chapter 10.
the SKKB
See below,



(
一



Chapter 4
LOST, APOCRYPHAL AND DOUBTFUL WORKS
Sa-pap's collected works have come down to us in an incomplete and imper-
fect form. Several major treatises by his hand were lost from an early time, and
what genuine works do survive have been joined over the centuries by a consider-
able number of spurious accretions.
Lost Works
At least five works that Sa-pan himself considered representative of his
achievements in specific areas of scholarship have quite simply disappeared from
his oeuvre. These are the following, which he mentions in his Nga brgyad ma'
grel pa:
(1) Grub mtha'i rnam 'byed (p. 149.2.5)
(2) Mkhas pa't kha rgyan (p. 149.4.4)
(3) Sku szugs kyi bstan bcos (p. 150.4.4)
(4) Sa brtag pa (p. 150.4.4)
(5) Yan lag brgyad pa'i don bsdus (p. 151.1.3)
The Grub mtha'i rnan 'byed, a lost treatise on Buddhist and non-Buddhist philoso-
phical tenets, is referred to in no less than four of his extant works." The
Mkhas pa'1 kharryan is clearly described by Sa-pan as beings a poetical work, and
thus it is probably not the grammatical work by this name found near the end of
the Derge edition of his oeuvre (TB no. 109). The remaining three in the list
were on Iconometry, geomancy and medicine, respectively. Another vanished work is
his treatise on grammar entitled Shes rab 'phro ba. He refers to it in his Byis
Da bde blag' and Sgra la llug pa, both of which were early compositions. He is
also said by his disciple Lho-pa kun-mkhyen to have written a dramatical treatise
entitled Rab dga' la 'jug pa.



Doubtful and Spurious Works
Given Sa-pan's unquestioned and enduring stature as the first great pandita
of Tibet, it is natural that certain later writers would be tempted to try to gain
for their own writings some of the glory associated with his name by ascribing
their compositions to him. Such forgeries were usually fairly short, and a number
of them were accepted as genuine and inserted into his collected works. A few
such works may have cropped up very early, but fortunately most seem to have
appeared from the 16th century onward. These can be found among the late addi-
tions to the lists of his writings.
The seven main accessible lists of the contents of Sa-pan's oeuvre are in
the following:
(1) Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po's gaan vis
(2) Gong-dkar "Phrin-las-rnat-rgyal's gaan vis
(3) Dkon-mchog-lhun-grub's gsan yig
(4) The Fifth Dalai Lama's ssan yig
(5) Zhu-chen Tshul-khrim-rin-chen's index to the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum
(6) Zhu-chen's gaan vis
(7) A manuscript index to one volume of Sa-pan's works listing some fifty
minor writings
The first is a list of Sa-pan's works as they were recited to Ngor-chen by Shar-
chen Ye-shes-rgyal-mtshan probably at Sa-skya, before the latter died in 1406.
The second is a rare source which I saw briefly and from which I was able to copy
this passage. The copy I saw was a 244-folio du med manuscript, bearing the
title Thob yig bum pe bzang po. The lineages of Sa skya bka! 'bum lungs are
recorded in fascicle da. This was the record of teachings received by 'Phrin-las-
rnam-rgyal, a later teacher in the Gong-dkar tradition. Though I could not study
the whole work in detail, it dates to the late-17th century at the earliest. The
third source was another manuscript which I saw briefly and from which I copied
out this passage. The copy I saw was a 159-folio manuscript in dbu med script.
Its full title was: Chos kyl. Ele dpal ldan bla me dan po trams las dam pa'l chos
thos pali tshul al bar bahad pa'i vi se thub batan yg pali nyin byed.
Actually Zhu-chen Tshul-khrima-rin-chen purports to indicate the contents of this
gan yig of Dkon-richog-Thun-grub as well as that of Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs, in
sources nos. 5 and 6 in the above list, 1.e. Zhu-chen's index and gan yig. In
those works Zhu-chen marked the titles of each work with the numerals 9 or 24 if
they appeared in the gan yigs of these two, who were respectively the 9th [1.e.



10th) and 24th [1.e. 25th) mkhan po of Ngor. When comparing these indications
with the actual gsan sig of Dkon-mchog-lhun-grub, however, one can see that Zhu-
chen's notes are not always reliable, and therefore they have not been used here.
No. 6, Zhu-chen's gan yig, is almost identical with his Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum
Index. The last source, no. 7, I located in a monastic library in Nepal. In
addition, there are two short lists that I have compiled on the basis of twenty
works that survive in an old manuscript from Glo-bo and nineteen works in an old
manuscript volume from Sa-skya. (For the full lists from the san vigs of Ngor-
chen, Gong-dkar "Phrin-las-rnam-rgyal, Dkon-achog-lhun-grub and the Fifth Dalai
Lama, from the old manuscript index, and from the Glo-bo and Sa
see below, Appendixes A, B, C, D, M, N, and 0.)
These lists give a good idea of the contents of actually existing collec-
tions in different periods. The Ngor-pa tradition predominates, being attested by
all but nos. 2 and 7. Even the Fifth Dalai Lama incorporated into his gaan yig a
Ngor-pa list, though he had also received the lung within the Gong-dkar-ba
lineage.' When using these lists one must bear in mind the possibility that some
very short works may have been omitted by accident. Such minor omissions are not
uncommon in both gsan yigs and indexes to collected works.
Finally, there also exist three lists of Sa-pan's works given in the bio-
graphies of Sa-pap by Glo-bo mkhan-chen, Rin-spungs-pa and A-mes-zhabs, which were
composed in 1527, 1579 and 1629, respectively. These were not lists of works as
actually recited during a lung transmission or as actually existing in a given
manuscript collection. Rather, the first was a general summary of his works, and
the latter two were attempts at listing every work he ever wrote, regardless of
whether they were still extant or not. Thus we find listed in the works by Sa-
pap which were lost from an early period, as well as quite a few doubtful and
apocryphal works. Rin-spungs-pa in particular seems to have been very free,
including anything he heard of or came across that bore Sa-pap's name. These
three lists thus do not have the same value as positive witnesses as the previous
ones, but the second two (both of which are quite long) do give valuable informa-
tion of a negative sort. If a given work was not listed by either of them, then
it probably had no significant circulation in two important centers of Gtsang in
the late-16th and early-17th centuries. (For these three lists in full, see
below, Appendixes E, F and L.)



Table 3. Eleven Lists of Sa-pan's Works
Abbreviations:
TB - Toyo Bunko reprint of Sa-pan's works as they appear in the Derge Sa skya bka!
'bum (Tokyo : 1968). The numbers are from the index to vol. 5, pp. V-xvi11.
This list accords with Zhu-chen's Sa skya bka' 'bum index (1736), except at
the end.
NgCh = Ngor-chen's asan yig Thob vig) (c. 1400)
GK - Gong-dkar 'Phrin-las-rnam-rgyal's asan yig (Thob yig) (c. 1700?)
KLH = Dkon-nchog-lhun-grub's gsan yig (Chos kys) (16th c.)
DL5 - The Fifth Dalai Lama's gaan yig (Zab pa) (mid-17th c.)
Sa - One volume from a Sa-skya MS of the Sa skya bka' 'bum
dkar - The Index (dkar chag) to one volume of an old manuscript of Sa-pap's works
G = The Glo-bo manuscript
KHJNSh - Glo-bo mkhan-chen's Mkhas iue roam bahad (1527)
RP - Rin-spungs-pa ("Jam pa't) (1579)
AMZH = A-mes-zhabs "Dzam gling) (1629)
TB
NgCh
GK
Kih
DLS
Sadkar
G
KhJNSH
414779 25
12036172219
95 1 1 1
WN -
WN -
GUERVOU AWN,
- mnooo
108 98 89a9
10 96 10 10 11
15 11 9 7 11 11 12
16121212 1313



(Table 3, continued)
TB
NgCh
GK
KLA
DL5
Sa
d kar
G
KOJNSH
RP
AMZh
322
28
29-30
29ab
34
392



(Table 3, continued)
TB
NgCh
GK
DL5
Sa
d kar
G
KHUNSH
RP
AMZh
a
11/12?
15 54/76?
52
31?
97(362)



(Table 3, continued)
Ngch
GK
KLM
Sa
dkar
G
KHJNSH
RP
AMZh
87
60 327169
36
35
47
9
30
70106
8185
51
19
36
109
111
112
69
33
332



From a comparison of these lists one can provisionally conclude that some
thirty works found in the Derge edition were later additions to Sa-pap's oeuvre.
This does not mean that they all need be counted as suspect. Some, being highly
esoteric, vere probably considered inappropriate for inclusion in his bkal bum as
first compiled. They may have been preserved separately as individual works or
as parts of other collections such as in be'u 'bums, large compilations of sadha-
nas, or among the Lam 'bras literature. It will have to remain for future re-
search to try to trace the provenance of each. For the present it is enough to
note these Tantric works as late additions. For the non-Tantric works, however,
the failure to be listed in the earlier sources is prima-facie evidence of doubt-
ful authenticity.
The following were later additions:
(TB no. 3) Gzhung luge lege par bshad pa. This is listed in the asan xis of Gong-
dkar "Phrin-las-ran-rgyal, and it is also mentioned by Rin-spungs-pa and A-
mes-habs. But it is spurious, as I have discussed elsewhere."
(TB no. 11) Rnam par scad bya 11 ltar sbyor tshul
(TB no. 12) Sngags kyi klog thabs "bras bu 'byung bali me tog. The first and only
listing of these is in the two lists of Zhu-chen. They must be considered
doubtful.
(TB no. 32) Rtors Idan rgyan po'i dris lan. This seems to have been one of the
three works ascribed to Sa-pan's disciple Bi-j1 that were acquired from Khams
in the time of Rgyal-tshab Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug (1424-1478)."
(TB no. 33) Rnel phu ba'i zhus lan.
(TB no. 39) Sho dron pa gro ugon rin chen la spring ba
(TB no. 40) Sho doon ayi dge 'dun la spring ba
These three, and especially the last two, are probably spurious. They make
their first and only definite appearance in Zhu-chen's lists (1736).
(TB no. 47) Grub chen bcu
(TB no. 48) Phra mo brgyad
This pair was a late addition from the Lam 'bras. The first was included in
the Pod dmar chung compiled by Rgyal-tshab Kun-dgal-dbang-phyug, and it also
1s listed by A-mes-zhabs. Neither appear in the earlier gaan vigs.



(TB no. 54) Lan 'bras bu dang bcas pa'1 khrid kyi dkar chag. As will be ex-
plained below, this seems to be a dubious work that Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-
po rejected. It was probably extracted from a Lan 'bras volume.
(TB no. 57) Kag chol gyi les gnang
(TB no. 58) Beri ba'i gdams pa thun mong ma yin pa
(TB no. 59) Man bgaa badus pa
This group of three minor Tantric works seems to be found only in the Derge
index and Zhu-chen's gaan yig, and not in the other lists.
(TB no. 61) Riga drug mtshan don dang ye shes bsre ba.
Gong-dkar "Phrin-las-rnan-rgyal and Rin-spungs-pa are the only other
rences to this work. It may be considered suspect.
refe-
(TB no. 62) Rigs kyt rab dbye' bahad sbyar. This purports to be Sa-pap's comple-
tion of a work left slightly unfinished by Grags-pa-rgyal-mtahan. It war-
rants a careful investigation, even though it appears in several lists.
(TB no. 63) Sgra sgrub dum bu dgu pa. This too should be examined carefully, even
though it is listed by Gong-dkar 'Phrin-las-rna-rgyal, Dkon-mchog-lhun-grub
and (by a different title) in the old manuscript index.
(TB no. 76) Gangs can syi sgom chen la gdams pa
(TB no. 77) Bu slob rnams la spring ba
of this pair, the first appears in the san vigs of Dkon-mchog-lhun-grub and
the Fifth Dalai Lama. The second is listed by both Gong-dkar "Phrin-las-
rnam-rgyal and Dkon-mchog-Thun-grub. They do not, however, appear elsewhere.
Both deserve to be reexamined with this in mind.
(TB no, B3) Dod mo 1 pa'i Atsug lag khang du bengags pa.
This does not appear anywhere outside of Zhu-chen's lists and is therefore to
be doubted.
(TB no. 89) Sdud pa soga sher. mdo "don thabs
(TB no. 90) Phung po asum pa' mdo 'don thaba
These are apparently late additions. They are, however, perhaps genuine
since the Fifth Dalai Lama records a separate lung lineage for them.
(TB no. 97) Ston pa blo gros rab gsal ayi dris lan



92
(TB no. 99) Ral 'byor pa phru ma'i dris lan
These two works ascribed to Bi-ji (like no. 32 above) appeared from Khams in
the second half of the 15th century."
(TB no. 101) Bde mchos Lhan skyes kyi byin labs
(TB no. 102) Rlung gi rten 'brel brtag pa
The first of these is mentioned by A-mes-zhabs, but it does not appear in the
earlier esan yigs. The second is otherwise unknown, though the similar title
Lus kyi rten "brel appears as no. 6 in the old manuscript index.
(TB no. 103) Mnal lam gvi tshiga bcad
This single verse is also found in the Gaung sgros ma biography of Sa-pan
attributed to Ngor-chen (Lam 'bras, vol. ka, p. 616.2).
(TB no. 105) Khro bo sme brtsegs kyi sgrub thabs
This is listed by Gong-dkar Phrin-las-rnam-rgyal and Rin-spungs-pa.
(TB no. 106) Lus kyl zag pa sbyin pa atang ba'i gzungs
(TB no. 107) Rang gis rang la gros 'debe pe.
(TB no. 108) Dus bcos.
The first two are listed only by Zhu-chen. The second should be considered
apocryphal because its colophon is anachronistic, as discussed above. The
third title appears in the lists of the Cong-dkar-ba and Rin-spunga-pa.
(TB no. 109) Bstan bcos mkhas pa'i kha rgyan
Though this work is listed by Gong-dkar "Phrin-las-rnam-rgyal and is extant
in the Sa-skya and Glo-bo manuscripts, its authenticity is to be carefully
examined because it is a grammatical, not a poetical, work. As mentioned
above, one of Sa-pan's lost works was a poetical treatise with this title.
(TB no. 110) Lege bshad 'phrul gyi dra ba
This is found only in the Derge edition, and Zhu-chen himself marked it as
"doubtful" (the tshom can)." It is most certainly not genuine, as will be
explained below in more detail.
(TB no. 114) Bshes pali spring yig si badus don
This was a final addition to the Derge edition. It was appended sometime
after the completion of the index. It is otherwise unknown, and must there-
fore be counted as probably apocryphal. 18



Finally one should note that TB nos. 23 and 111 too were additions since
they were not by Sa-pap. The first, the Bde mchog lo hi pa't Ibru bum by the
12th-century master Gnyan Phug-chung-ba, was added to an early manuscript set of
Sa-pap's works (or of the Sa skya bka' bum) to fill out a small volume, and the
Derge editors retained it for the same purpose. The second is the work Dpal Idan
akya pandita chen po'i rnam par thar pa, a biography of Sa-pan by his student
Zhang Royal-ba-dpal. It is not uncommon to find a biography of a Tibetan master
added to his collected writings, and in this case we can be grateful to the Derge
editors for preserving in this way an otherwise rare work.
Unidentified and Extra Titles in the Lists
One cannot definitely link all the titles in the above lists with works
included in the Derge edition. Some can be identified as known lost works, some
as apocryphal writings, and some as extant works which for some reason were not
included in that edition. A number of other titles simply cannot be traced. For
the sake of future ease of reference I will list the various extra works here.
Ngor-chen's Gaan yis
From Ngor-chen's Thob yig there were only two which could not be positively
identified:
(25) Rtogs Idan scig gis dris pa't lan
(67) Yang drie lan mdor badus pagig
Gong-dkar Phrin-las-rnam-ravalls Gsan yig
Quite a few works listed in the Gong-dkar gaan yis could not be positively
identified within the Derge edition of Sa-pan's bka! 'bum. These are:
(9) Khyad par "phags bstod pa rrya cher 'grel pa'i kha skong (5 ff.)
(13) Sange Eryas la bstod pa tshte ei phreng ba (2 ff.)
(19) Jan dbyangs a ra pa tsa na lha Inga'i mngon par rtogs pa (3 ff.)
(21) Mtshan br fod 'don thabs (3 ff.)
(25) and (26) are possibly one and the same work.
(27) Chos gsung tahul (3 ff.)
(34) It is interesting to note that a basic text (rtsa be) of the Sdomssum
rab dbye consisting of two folios is recorded to have existed separately
from the full version.
(41) Grwa pa rnams la spring vix (2 ff.)



(42) Rtse mdo'i dge 'dun (la spring ba]
(48) Thos bsam sgom gsum gyi dris lan (3 ff.)
(51) Rtogs ldan syi dris lan, here linked to "Snye-mo sgom-chen" in a mchan
bu.
It identifies by means of the marker ka twelve works as belonging purely
to the Lam 'bras: nos. 6, 7, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, and 67.
He states that there is therefore no lung transmission for them. Of these,
the following seven are not found in the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum:
(56) Rdo rjeli lus kyi 'khrul khor
(58) Brda don gsal ba (2 ff.)
(59) Tho yig rin chen sgron me (4 ff.)
(60) Khrid kyi lung sbor (4 ff.)
(61) Lho pa'i zin bris (2 ff.)
(62) Yang zin bris gcis (5 ff.)
(67) "Khor bzhi'i rgya'i yi ge (1 f.)
Other unaccounted-for works are:
(63) Phyag rgya chen po'i dbye ba (2 ff.)
(66) Dpal sa skya pa'i gces pa rnams phyogs rcig tu badus pa (31 ff.) This
and the following work were quite substantial.
(75) Tshul bzhi'i bsdus don snying po (18 ff.)
(78) "Dod royal syi rjes gnang (3 ff.)
(84) Thod pa brtag thabs (2 ff.). This title was added in a mchan bu.
(90) Chos spyod bcu pa
(92) Rgvas bring bsdus gsum gyi nyams len. This and the preceding were
quite short.
Dkon-mchog-lhun-grub's Gsan yig
According to Zhu-chen, five works from Dkon-mchog-Thun-grub's &san yis had
not been located by 1736. As listed in the Derge index, these were:
(1) Brtag gnyis kyi sa bcad sna bsring ba
(2) Thub pa'i bstod pa lhug pa
(3) Gur ston zhus lan
(4) Bkal gdams pa nam mkha' 'bum svi dris lan mdor bedus
(5) Yan 18g bdun ldan syi rtsa ba
Sometime after 1736, however, the first and fifth were located and appended to the
end of the bka' 'bum (TB nos. 112 and 113). Thus as it now stands only the middle
three remain unidentified.



Actually, from the esan yig as I copied it, only one work could not be
identified, namely (56) Thub pa'i bstod pa lhus pa. Moreover, Zhu-chen erroneous-
ly affixed the number 9 to the following works, which were not listed in the esan
yig as accessible to me: TB nos. 23, 33, 42, 43, 49, 78, 89, 90, 93, 99, 104, 108,
and 109.
The Fifth Dalai Lama's Gsan yig
The following five works listed in the Fifth Dalai Lama's gaan yis
not be located in the Derge edition:
could
(2) Yan lag brgyad pa'i snying po. This title is given in a note (achan
bu), which also specifies that no lung existed for this work. It is a
medical work now presumed lost.
(14) Khyad par "phags batod kyi rrya cher bshad pa. This title too is given
with a chan bu, and no lung is said to exist. (See below, ch. 9, note 22.]
(34) Brda don gsal ba rtsa 'grel
(35) Phyag teva chen po rab tu dbye ba
This pair, together with a third work, are said to be listed in the indexes
(dkar chag) to collected works, but not in the gan yigs.
(38) Sa bdun pa yan chad 'khor bzhi raya zhes pa'1 dgonge pa ston po.
The compiler of this list seems to have been comparing earlier gaan vigs with an
actual manuscript or its index. He attempts to identify his nos. 9a Yi ge'i sbyor
ba and 9b Sgra nye bar badus pa as one. At no. 26a he adds the note that the work
Rtoge Idan zhik 81 dris lan is listed in the gaan yig but is not found in the
index, and he makes the same observation about his nos. 33-35. Concerning no. 45,
Tshora kyi 'khor lo'i cho ga rtsod spong ma, he notes that some manuscripts state
that Sa-paņ composed it in Ling-chu-rtse, while others do not. At no. 58a there is
a note stating that according to the gsan vigs there is a work Batod pa lhus (pal,
but that in fact it cannot be found. Four works, nos. 73-76, are said not to be
listed in the gaan vigs, but he nevertheless succeeded in tracing lung lineages
for them from elsewhere. These are:
(73) Zhen bzhi bral si man ngag
(74) "Phars pe jan dpal ayi mtshan yang dag. par br jod pa 'don thabs
(75) 'Phagg pa adud pe sora shes rab kyi pha rel tu phyin pagdon palkman
ngag
(76) Phung po sum pa gdon pa'i man ngag



Finally, on no. 81 Bka! Adams do skor ba'i dris lan, he says that the gsan yigs do
not refer to it clearly except as "a brief reply to a question" (dri lan badus
pa).
The Old Manuscript Index
From the index of the old manuscript (dkar), these five titles remain
unidentified:
(6) Lus kyi rten 'brel
(11) Lha mo bco Inga'1 bstod pa
(22) "Jam pa'i rdo rie la betod pa
(33) Gus pas gol ba 'debs pa'i ngor. sbyar ba
(49) Jog po pa'i zhus lan (CF. A-mes-zhabs no. 48)
No. 33 is of course only a "ghost" title (cf. the ending of TB no. 113). No. 11
is perhaps to be connected with no. 12 of the same source and TB no. 65.
The Glo-bo Manuscript
Among the twenty works surviving in the Glo-bo manuscript (G), the
lowing two short works were not included in the Derge edition:
fol-
(14) Chos spyod bcu pa
(16) Yum rgyas 'bring sdus gsum svi don
The List from Rin-spungs-pa's Biography of Sa-pap.
From the list provided by Rin-spungs-pa, so far some thirty-one have not
been identified within the Derge edition:
(1) Bzo rig batan bcos (lost]
(2) Rtsis kyi atsug lag gi batan bcos
(3) Yan lag brgyad pa'i badus don (lost?]
(5) Sgra shes rab tug pa (=the lost Shes rab 'phro ba? Or is it a mistake
for the extant treatise Sgra la "dug pa (TB no. 7)?]
(11) Snyan ngag mkhas pa'i kha rgyan
(22) Bde mchog lha Inga sgrub pa'i thabs
(26) Bde bar gshega pa la bstod tshig
(31) "Jam pa'1 dbyange atso 'khor Inga la mchod par brjod pa'i bstod pa
(33) Jam dpal lha Inga'i bskyed rim mungon toga
(36) Rgyal po lo pap rhams la bstod pa (cf. no. 98; TB no. 75)



rol pa'i kha
(38) Phyag rgya chen por dbye ba
(420) Rdo rje lus kyi 'khrul "khoe dang (42b) Brda dongsal
(48) Geung ngag zin par bris yis mdor batan
(49) Khrid kyi lung sbyor.
(53) Tshul gzhi'1 bsdus pa'i don
(56) Thod pa brtag pa'i thabs
(57) Rgyud sde spyi yi man bgag gces pa bsdus pa
(59) Rdo re rnam 'toms bir luga kyi mungon par rtogs pa
(69) Gzhan las khyad par du 'phags par bstod pa'i rgya cher
skong
(70) Sher phyin rgyae 'bring bsdus sum nyams su len thabs
(71) Chos spyod bcu pa
(73) Dam pa'i chos la jug tshul go bder sbyar
(83) Bri khung tlg rten gyi mgon po la spring yig
(84) Spyan snga erara 'byung bar bstod pa spring via bcas pa
(87) Gur ston svi dris lan
(96) Bsam yas kyi gtaug lag khang la bangags pa
(98) Chos gsungs pali tshul
(100) Skyes bu'1. rnan 'byed gzhon nuli mgul rgyan
(101) Legs bsbad nyi ma'i snying po
The List from A-mes-zhabs's Biography of Sa-pan
The following seventeen titles were listed by A-mes-zhabs but are now
either lost or not identifiable among the works in the Derge edition:
(1) Shes rab 'phro ba (lost]
(13) Rab dga'i fug pa (lost)
(15) Sku gzugs kyi batan bcos (lost]
(16) Sa brtag pa'i rab 'byed [lost]
(17) Yan lag brgyad pa'i badus don (lost?]
(18) Sangs rgyas kyi bstod pa (cf. TB no. 71)
(19) Thub pa'i bstod pa
(22) Bsam yas lhun syis grub pa'i gnas chen la bstod pa
(24) Grub wtha'i raam 'byed (lost]
(29) Chos nyams su blang ba'i rim pa
(30) Chos spyod bcu pa
(44) Shing kun na bzhugs pa'i dge 'dun rnams la spring yig
(48) Od jo ba'i dge bshes la spring yig
(55) Gzal yum ayi sgrub thabs



(75) Sam pu te la mchan
(76) Rdo rjeram om syi. Egyud la mchan
(77) Sdom gsum rab dbye la mchan
Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen's Gsan yig
The esan yig of Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen (vol. 2, pp. 421.2-432.6
[kha 211a-216b]) is very similar to his index to the Sa skya bka' 'bum, and
therefore it has not been listed separately. The few special comments or minor
differences that do exist occur mainly near the end of the list:
(TB 54) Lam 'bras khrid kyi dkar chag. Zhu-chen noted (p. 428.1 - 2135.6)
that since this work is not found in the volumes of his collected works and
is not listed in the gaan vigs, one must investigate whether there is a
lung for it or not.
Thub pali. batod pa tshig lhug pa. This work is listed between TB 70 and 71
(p. 428.2 - 2146.2). But Zhu-chen noted that though it is listed in the
asan vigs, he did not receive its lung because the work was not actually
located.
(TB 77) Bu slob rnams la spring ba. Regarding this work he notes (p. 429.1 -
2154.1) that in the Gsan yig dbang gi rgyal pe (of Sangs-rgyas-phun-
tshogs) there is a (second?] work listed as Bod yul la bangage pa, which he
supposed was a defective spelling for this work since there is nothing else
it could be besides this. [What about TB no. 69, Bodyul la bsngage pa?)
He also noted that the title actually appearing on the work is Bod "bangs
spyi la gdams pa. Zhu-chen made the same coment in his Sa skya bka' 'bum
Index, p. 329.4.2 (- ba 4496.2).
(TB 81) Yon tan sgroge pa'i tahul (or: tshal?] la bstod ps. Zhu-chen noted
(p. 429.4. 215a.4) that this is the Pa gorzhes bya bali sgra las betod pa
(of the asan yigs).
Gur ston zhus lan. This work is listed between TB nos. 97 and 98. Zhu-chen
commented (p. 431.1 - 2160.1) that it was listed in the gaan yigs but not
located. In an annotation (mchan bu), he also says that he did not get the
lung for that and for the Blagdams pa nam mkha 'bum svi dris lan. (But
the latter was listed separately above as TB 96!)



(TB 101) Bde mchog Ihan skyes kyi byin rlabs ras pa shes rab 'od kyi don du
mdzad pa and (TB 102) Rlung gi rten 'brel. Zhu-chen noted (p. 431,6 -
2160.6) that no lung existed for this pair because they are not listed in
the gsan yigs.
(TB 110) Lege bshad 'phrul gvi dra ba. Before this work, Zhu-chen (p. 432.3
- 2165.3) 11sted the work Legs par bshad pa gzhon nu'i mgul tayan. In a
note he stated that the latter was held by Rin-spungs-pa to be Sa-pan's
work. Regarding the Lege bahad 'phrul gyl dra ba, he said there is a basis
for doubting its authenticity. Because neither appear in the gaan yigs,
both are said to lack lung lineages.
(TB 112) Rje btsun rin po ches mdzad pa'i kye rdo rte'i rayud brtar gayi kyl
sa bcad sna baring ba. He did not receive a lung for it because the text
was not found.
(TB 111) Sa-pan's Rnam thar by Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal and (TB 114)
spring badus don. Both are missing from Zhu-chen's gan yis.
the Bahes
Lam 'bras Works
In the list of Sa-pan's writings from Gong-dkar "Phrin-las-ram-rgyal's
an yig, some twelve works were indicated as belonging to the Lam 'bras, of which
seven are not found in the Derge edition of his bka! 'bum. In addition, one
should note that there are twelve works ascribed to Sa-pan in the Lam 'bras gzhung
bahad pod dmar ma compiled by Rgyal-tshab Kun-dgal-dbang-phyug (1424-1478).“
these, eight are found in his collected works (Derge edition), but the following
four have not yet been identified there:
(Pod dmar 29) Brda don gsal ba
2
(Pod dmar 34) Phyag raya chen po'i dbye ba
(Pod dmar 35) "Khor bzhi brgyali bshad pa
(Pod dmar 51) Rnam joms kyi gzhung la sa skya panditas mchan bumdzad pa
The esan yig of the Fifth Dalat lists as many as twenty Lam 'bras works attributed
to Sa-pan. (For the full list, see below, Appendix H.) Thus several of the
"extra" works in the lists of Gong-dkar 'Phrin-las-rnan-rgyal, Rin-apungs-pa and
A-tes-zhabs are extant, though outside Sa-pan's readily available bka! 'bum:
(GK 58) - (RP 42b) = (Pod dmar 29)? - (DL 34) Brda don gsal



100
(GK 63) - (RP 38) - (Pod dmar 34) = (DL 35) Phyag rgya chen po'1 dbye ba
(GK 67) - (Pod dmar 35) "Khor bzhi rgya'i bshad pa
(GK 92) - (RP 70) - (G 16)? Yum rgyas 'bring sdua gsum eyi don
(QK 90) = (RP 71) = (G 14) - (AMZh 30) Chos spyod bcu pa
(AMZH 76) = (Pod dmar 51) Rnam joms kyi rgyud la mchan
These results, however, are only tentative because of the brief and cursory nature
of this survey. A definitive and detailed picture of the full extent of Sa-pap's
genuine oeuvre will emerge only after each title and work has been carefully
compared and investigated.
Works Criticized or Doubted
by Previous Sa-skya-pa Scholars
Although some doubtful works seem to have been accepted without question,
some others were pounced upon and rejected by the more critically minded scholars
within the tradition. Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po (1389-1456), for instance,
criticized for doctrinal reasons a minor work on the Lam 'bras attributed to Sa-
pan: the "Dkar chag tu byed pa," which would seem to be TB no. 54, Lam 'bras bu
dang bcas pa't khrid kyi dkar chag. However, Rdo-r je-rgyal-mtahan (1. mid-15th
c.) of the Rdzong-pa lineage defended this work and included it among the Lam
'bras texts he used. The authenticity of this work was later investigated by Glo-
bo mkhan-chen (who found it among the oldest available manuscripts), and this
controversy was also mentioned by the Fifth Dalai Lama.
Another work that some later authorities rejected was the Gzhung luge lege
par bahad pa (TB no. 3). Ngag-dbang-chos-grags found it unacceptable for several
reasons, and one must agree that he was right. Zhu-chen Tahul-khrims-rin-chen
inexplicably included it in the Derge edition, but in his index he cast doubt on
the work entitled Legs bshad 'phrul si dra ba (TB no. 110). In his sean yig
he also mentioned the Lege bshad gzhon nuli mgul rayan--a work which Rin-spungs-pa
seems to have accepted (RP 100)--as being doubtful. Zhu-chen was no doubt
correct in singling out the Legs bahad 'phrul si dra ba as dubious, for it is
more or less the same as the Bod kyi. chos rgyal chen po srong btsan sgam poli blon
chen drung gi phyi rabs kyi gang zag rnams la phan phyir luge gyis la gdams pali
balabbya batan bcos nyi ma'i 'od zer which survives as a manuscript in the Toyo
Bunko." In addition, Zhu-chen called into doubt the Sgrub pa lung 'boge pa (TB
no. 43) because it has no author's colophon (1).



101
Finally, I should mention three likely forgeries that have surfaced recent-
ly. The first is a work entitled Chos rte sa skya papditas adzad pa'i chos 'byung
chen no preserved in the Bihar Research Society, Patna (provisional catalogue no.
It is an incomplete manuscript that originally consisted of forty folios,
ten of which are now missing. It includes a biography of the Buddha Sakyamuni and
an exposition of the correct method for learning the Buddhist teachings. The
second is a religious didactic work entitled Snyin [sic] ngas rang szhung padma
dkar po'i phreng ba. Though not on poetics as its title would seem to indicate,
It was published together with a number of works on the literary arts preserved in
Ladakh. The third suspect text is entitled Rt.se, bdun me and it consists of
seven admonitory verses. It has been published at the end of a Choe khorst
rnam gzhag by A-mes-zhabs and Chos-rnam-rgyal. As the cataloging of Tibetan
books proceeds, even more works ascribed to Sa-pan are sure to be found. Alas,
how few will be genuine!



102
NOTES
*Cf. the works listed in Lho-pa, pp. 556.5-569.5, which are now missing:
(1) Shes rab 'phro ba ("phal che ba la mkho be")
(2) Grub ntha'i ram 'byed
(3) Sayan ngar gibstan bcos Michas pa'i kha tayan
(4) Zlos gar gyi bstan bcos Rab dga' la 'jug pa
(5) Sku Rzugs kyi batan bcos
(6) Sa brtag pa'i rab tu byed pa
For the full list of works cited or quoted by Lho-pa, see below, Appendix G.
According to Kun-dga'-grol-mchog, Pandi ta, p. 76, Shakya-mchog-ldan
(1428-1507) expounded some eleven works of Sa-pap in Sa-skya at the age of twenty-
eight. These included the Snyan ngag mkhas pa'l khatryan (no. 9):
(1) Sdom gsum rab dbye
(2) Tshad ma rigs gter
(3) Thub pa'i dgongs gsal
(4) Mkhas pa jug pa'i sro
(5) Sgra nyer mkho bsdus pa
(6) Gso ba ria pa'i bstan bcos
(7) Sdeb sbyor me tog gi chun po
(8) Mngon br jod tahig gter
(9) Snyan ngag, mkhas pa'i kha Egyan
(10) Zlos gar rab dga'i 'fug pa
(11) Lega bahad rin po che'i eter
"As mentioned in the previous note, Shakya-nchog-ldan expounded a treatise
on medicine (2.80 ba rig pa'i bstan bcos) by Sa-pan. The only treatise on a
medical topic available in the Derge edition is TB no. 108, Dug bcos. In Dalai
blo-ma V, Zab pa, vol. 2, p. 126.2 (kha 63.2) there is listed a Yan lag brgyad
pa'l anying po attributed to Sa-pan for which, however, there was no lung. There
is some indication that this (possibly apocryphal) work may be still extant--
similar title attributed to Sa-paņ is listed in the bibliography of a recent
dictionary of Tibetan medicine. See Dbang-'dus, Bod gangs can, p. 714: Brgyad
pa't saying po badus pa warpa'i phreng ba. However, I was informed by one of the
scholars at the Lha-sa Sman-rtsis-khang that this work was not actually available,
but was probably only listed as a bibliographical item.



103
RTRG, P. 172.2.1; Kh), p. 107.2.2; Thus, p. 24.4.2; and Nga brgyad ma'l,
p. 149.2.5.
"Nga brgyad mali, p. 149.4.4: snyan ngag 81 gtaug lag Itar bahad shes pa
dang/ 'di dag 'chad pa't batan bcos kyang/ kho bos byas pa'i mkhas pa'i kha
rayan zhes bya ba'i bstan bcos der bita bar bya'o//
6p. 117.4.1.
7p. 115.4.6.
"Lho pa, pp. 568.3. See also no. 10 from among the works expounded by
Shakya-mchog-Idan as listed above, note 2.
Dalai bla-ma V, Zab pa, vol. 2, p. 117.3 (kcha 59a.3). See also ibid.,
vol. 2, p. 130.2 (kha 65b.2) where he specifies a different title in the tradition
of Gong-dkar-ba (song dkar ba lugs la).
"According to [Zhu-chen], Dpal sa, p. 319.2.2, many Tantric works of the
first three founders were excluded from their bka! 'bums, but there is no mention
of similar exclusions from the oeuvres of Sa-pap and 'Phags-pa.
"See D. Jackson (1985); above, chapter 2, no. (7); and L. van der Kuijp
(1985a). Here I should add that Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, who identified it as a
forgery, earlier had considered it to be genuine. See his Tshad me rige pali, P.
63.3 (32a.3). He wrote this work in 1611 (1cags mo phag).
KHJNSh, pp. 30a.4-34a.4, 39a.4-43a.6. See also chapter 9, note 29.
* They were probably written by someone from Sho-dgon-pa with the aim of
glorifying that monastery.
14 See above, note 12.
This seems to be a genuine work that circulated independently from his
bka! 'bum for nearly five centuries before being included in the Derge edition.
For references to Sa-pan's connection with this practice, see 6. Tucci (1932-41),
vol. IV, part 2, p. 11, and Dalai bla-na V, Zab pa, vol. 1, p. 180.5.



16see above, p. 61, and below, chapter 5, note 59.
"[Zhu-chen). Dpal sa, p. 330.3.2 (ba 451a.2).
18 See below, chapter 6, note 4.
19[Zhu -chen], Dpal sa, p. 330.3.3 (ba 45la.3).
20Dalat bla-ma V, Zab pa, vol. 2 pp. 126.2-130,6 (cha 636-65b).
-Lam "bras gzhung bahad pod dmar ma (Dolanji, 1974).
22610-bo mkhan-chen, Rab 'byams blo gros, vol. cha, pp., 1995-200a. See
also above, chapter 3, notes 19 and 20.
23 Dalai bla-ma V, Zab pa, vol. 1, p. 457.
24see above, note 11.
25[Zhu-chen], Dpal sa, p. 330.3.2 (ba 451a.2)
2zhu-chen, Dpal ldan bla ma, vol. 2, p. 432.4.
4'I ove this information to Mr. Tashi Tsering.
, p. 329.1.3 (ba 448a.3): 'di la mdaad byang med pas
28[Zhu-chen). Dpal
sa pan yin min brtag.
-One might have been tempted to link it with Gong-dkar-ba no. 27 and Rin-
spungs-pa no. 98, Chos gaunga pa'i tshul, but Gong-dkar Phrin-las-ram-rgyal's
son yie specifies that the latter consisted of only 3 folios.
The Literary Arts in Ladakh (Darjeeling: 1972), vol. 1, pp. 1-39 (la-
20b). This versified sermon with prose autocommentary has the alternative title:
Dam pa't chos la bakul ba't gtam padma dkar po'i phreng ba, as found in the
colophon (p. 39.1 [200.11). A better reading of the first word of its title would
be saying ngag instead of snyan ngag.
See A-mes-zhabs, Chos 'khor, pp. 36.7-37.6 (185.7-198.6).



Chapter 5
SA-SKYA PANDITA'S CAREER AS A SCHOLAR OF PRAMĀŅA:
STUDIES AND TRANSLATIONS
For modern Tibetan scholasticism, the study of Indian Pramaga is more or
less synonymous with the study of Dharmakirti's Pramagavärttika (PV). But this
was not always so. Before the advent of Sa-pap (and in some Tibetan schools, even
as late as the 14th century), the fundamental Indian Pramapa text most commonly
studied in Tibetan seminaries was the Pramāpavini Acaya (PVin) of Dharmakirti, a
much aborter and simpler work than the pv. The most frequently used Tibetan
manuals were the Summaries (Bsdus pe of Phywa-pa Chos-ky-seng-ge and his school.
Sa-pan, however, saw that these works gave an incomplete (and in the case of the
Tibetan manuals, a distorted) picture of Dharmakirti's thought. Therefore he made
it one of his main goals to master the vast and subtle PV and to restore it to
its rightful place of pre-eminence in Pranāņa studies.
Studies with Rkyang-'dur-ba Meshur Gzhon-nu-seng-re
Sa-paņ's mastery of Indian Buddhist logic and epistemology was the result
of long and arduous studies that began in about 1201, when he was some nineteen
years of age." To study Pramaşa, he had to leave Sa-skya because this was one
subject that his uncle Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan was not qualified to teach. (In
1158 when his other uncle Baod-name-rtse-no had gone off to study at the great
seminary of Gsang-phu Ne'u-thog in Central Tibet, Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan--then Just
a boy of some eleven years--had been obliged to stay behind in Sa-skya, and thus
his training as a dialectician had been minimal.)
According to some sources, Sa-pap first left Sa-skya in 1200 at the age of
eighteen to study under the great scholar Zhu-ston Rdo-rje-skyabs at "Phrang in
the upper Nyang valley." But Pramana was not one of the main subjects he studied
then. Instead, to get his first real instruction in this subject, Sa-pap left
Zhu-ston and joined the classes of Mtshur Gzhon-nu-seng-ge. The latter resided
and taught at the temple of Rkyang-'dur, which was also in the upper Nyang valley.
At this time Sa-pan was nineteen years of age and not a monk. He was a young
nobleman Glo sras) with only the vows of a lay adherent (upsaka: dge bsnyen).



106
According to Sa-pan's student and biographer Lho-pa kun-mkhyen Rin-chen-
dpal, the texts on Pramana he studied at this time were the PVin of Dharmakirti
and the Tarkamudgara of Jayānanda. But another student and biographer, Zhang
Rgyal-ba-dpal, asserts that his study of the PVin was accompanied by a text
called Gahal bya shes rab szron ma'i phreng ba, and Jayananda's text was accom-
panied by a quintessential elucidation (stong thun). The much later scholar
Shakya-nchog-Idan (1428-1507) asserts that Mtshur-ston also taught Sa-paņ one of
the Tibetan Summaries (badus pa).
Mtshur-ston (like the previous teacher, Zhu-ston) had been trained by
Phywa-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge at Gsang-phu Ne'u-thog. In the end, however, Mtshur's
most influential teacher would seem to have been Phyva-pa's student Gtsang-nag-pa
Brtson-'grus-seng-ge and the latter's chief disciple. It was natural that Sa-
pan was sent to study under masters belonging to the general tradition of Rngog
and Phywa-pa. Sa-pan's uncle Bsod-nams-rtse-mo had studied about eleven years at
Gsang-phu Ne'u-thog under Phywa-pa himself, and the seminary of Gsang-phu Ne'u-
thog was still one of the foremost centers of dialectical and scriptural studies
in Tibet.
Sa-pan's studies with Rkyang-'dur-ba continued for about two years (ca.
1201-1203). An undoubtedly brilliant student, Sa-paņ soon requested his
teacher for a chance formally to expound the PVin and thus make his official
debut as a scholastic teacher by giving his first scriptural exposition (bahad
8sar before a learned audience. But Meshur is said to have postponed this first
exposition and urged him to study more. In 1203 Sa-pay's studies were interrupted
by the news of his father's illness. Sa-pan hurried home to Sa-skya, but by the
time he reached there his father, Dpal-chen-'od-po, had already passed away. Thus
Sa-pan became further delayed because he had to participate in the "funeral"
time he is said to have sent Mt shur-ston a letter requesting him
to suspend the lectures for a short while. This was important to Sa-pan because
he hoped that year finally to give his first formal exposition. Mt shur-ston was
amenable to the request, but his other students--who were probably jealous of the
rich and brilliant young nobleman--resented this as an undue show of favoritism.
They threatened revolt, telling Mtshur, "If the young Sa-skya nobleman is enough
for you, we are going to disperse. But if you need us too, give us doctrinal
instruction!" At that Mtshur decided to carry on teaching.
Sa-paņ finally rejoined the group during the summer break between lectures
(dbyar chos bar), and it was then that he gave his first exposition. From Sa-skya
he had brought many items for hosting the necessary ceremonies and formal of -
ferings that would accompany his teachings. His preparatory studies had not been
very extensive: under Mtshur he had covered the second half of the PVin four times



107
and the first half only twice. His comprehension and memory, however, were
excellent. To begin with he offered (to Mtshur-ston?] (copies of the Prafiapära-
mitā) scriptures in their extensive, middling and brief forms. Mtshur then asked
him to give his exposition by repeating the basic work from the beginning. Sa-
pan did not comply exactly. Instead, he began to teach two sessions per day, one
starting from the beginning of the text and the other as an exposition of the
general sense of the work. Proceeding in this way, he taught the whole PV in from
memory in the course of one month. A11 the monastic students present were
antazed."
Sa-paņ also studied many other philosophical treatises with Meshur and
revered him, offering him much gold near the end of his studies under him. Even-
tually, however, Sa-pan came to reject many of the Pramäņa interpretations of
Phywa-pa and Gtsang-nag-pa's schools. According to some sources, Sa-pan had
already begun to doubt certain of the Tibetan interpretations and interpolations
even at the time of his studies with Meshur. If that is true, these doubts were
not confirmed until a little later when he gained direct access to the Pramapa
traditions of India.
Studies with Sakyaţribhadra
and His Disciples
The teachers who influenced Sa-pan's understanding of Pramaga most were
four papditas who arrived in Tibet from India in 1204. Of these, the chief was
Säkyatribhadra (11277-1225), a venerable abbot born in Kashmir who had achieved an
illustrious career as teacher and monastic leader in the great Buddhist seminaries
of Bihar and Bengal. Säkyasri travelled to Tibet accompanied by a retinue of nine
Junior panditas (pap chung). This was one of the largest delegations of Indian
Buddhist scholars known to have visited Tibet, and their visit had no doubt been
encouraged in part by the recent vandalic destruction of their home seminaries.
Sa-pan first met Säkyasri at Gtsang Chu-mig in the first half of 1204. At
that time Sa-pan was a twenty-two-year-old lay adherent, and he was returning to
Riyang-'dur from Sa-skya to continue his studies with Meshur Gzhon-nu-seng-ge.
According to one later account, Säkyasri had at that time already begun to teach
the PVin with the commentary of Dharmottara to a group of students. Sa-pan joined
the assembly and tried to follow along with his Tibetan texts while the great
Kashmiri pandita expounded from Sanskrit manuscripts. This is said to have to
have provoked the laughter and ridicule of some of the great teacher's retinue.
When Säkyasri asked what was causing their laughter, they said they were laughing



108
at the newcomer who had spread out the pages of his Tibetan books. Säkyari then
asked Sa-pap whether doing so was beneficial or not. Sa-pan replied, "Though it
does not benefit others, it helps me." Then, with his smattering of Sanskrit,
he translated the sense of the Tibetan version back into Sanskrit. Since it
became evident that Sa-paŋ knew what Tibetan corresponded to the Sanskrit, Sakya-
sri then scolded his subordinates for their laughter. With this meeting there
began what were to be some of the deepest and most extensive studies of Indian
Pramāņa by any Tibetan of any period.
The authoritative source that describes in detail Sa-pan's further studies
of Pramāņa under the Indian panditas is the biography of Sa-pan written by his
elderly disciple Lho-pa kun-mkhyen Rin-chen-dpal (f1. c. 1165-c. 1240).21 This
work was composed after Sa-paņ's debate with the Tirthika Harinanda (c. 1240) but
before his departure from Tibet in 1244.4 At the time of writing, Lho-pa was
apparently at a very advanced age. Lho-pa may be considered a well-informed
witness for he too was a disciple of Sa-pan's teachers such as Sakyasri and Spyi-
bo-has-pa, and he had been present during many of the teachings that he records
Sa-paņ received. And as he states in the biography, Lho-pa also consulted Sa-pan
for ascertaining some of his account. 44
Studies under Sugatasri
Of course, Sa-paņ at first could not receive the full benefit of Sakyasri's
teachings since the latter did not speak Tibetan and Sa-pan had not yet mastered
Sanskrit or any Indian vernacular. The first priority of his studies, then, was
to improve his Sanskrit. For this Sa-pan arranged to retain one of the Junior
panditas as his tutor, no doubt with the consent and support of his uncle Grags-
pa-rgyal-mtshan. This tutor was Sugatasri, a Buddhist pandita from a Brahmin
family of Atiwara in western India. He was very learned in Madhyamaka and
Prajñāpāramita. Sugatasri was also strong in Sanskrit and the related literary
arts; Lho-pa described him as a "great grammarian" (brda sprod pa chen po.
Since the main purpose of his tutoring Sa-pan was to give the latter a sound
foundation in the main branches of Sanskrit studies, he taught him many basic
works on grammar, poetics, prosody, kavya, lexicography (synonymy), and so forth.
teaching them directly from Sanskrit manuscripts. In addition, he taught Sa-pan
three works on Indian logic. The first of these was Dharmakirtis autocommentary
on the first chapter of the Pv. Sa-pan is said to have studied and then trans-
lated the 3,500 sloka units of text of this commentary. The second work was the
Tarkabhäsā of Mokşakaragupta. This too he learned and translated. Finally, he



109
seems to have studied the Nyāya Sūtras. His study of the latter work is parti-
cularly noteworthy because no other Tibetan scholar is recorded to have had a
first-hand acquaintance with this fundamental text of the Nyaya school.
Sa-pan seems to have studied with Sugatasri at Sa-skya over the course of
some three years, presumably from c. 1205 to early 1208. This stage in this
studies came to an end in about 1208 for this is when Sakyafri returned to Gtsang
from Dbus and met Sa-pan again."
The prolonged studies with Sugatasri were made possible only by the pres-
tige and wealth of the Sa-sky-pas. It was a very expensive undertaking to invite
an Indian pandita (or for that matter, any great teacher) to one's home monastery,
to provide for his needs for several years, and to pay tuition in the end through
various generous gifts. It is recorded that before Sugatasri left Sa-skya, Sa-pan
made costly gifts to him of gold, silver, silks and brocades, and gratified him in
many ways such as through the attendance of servants."
Studies with Sakyasribhadra
Sa-pan was reunited with Sakyasri by the time the latter was visiting the
temple of Rgyan-gong in Nyang-smad (the lower Nyang valley near Zhwa-lu) in the
year 1208. This was also the occasion when Sa-pan received full monastic ordi-
nation from Säkyasri. In the following years Sākyaari moved about to various
parts of Gtsang. He spent the following summer rainy-season retreats at Rin-chen-
sgang (in Shangs?)" (1209), Sa-skya (1210), Lu-gu-sdong in Zhang (1211), and
Khro-phu (1212).54 Sa-paņ probably spent much of these years with Sákyasri, for
he is recorded to have "stayed in his ſi.e. Sākyasri's) presence for a long time
and followed him." The Pramāņa texts that Šakyasritaught him are listed by
Lho-pa as follows: 36
(1) PV chapter III, following Manorathanandin
(2) PV, using the commentary of Devendrabuddhi with the Pramagasamuccaya
and quotations from Buddhist Sūtras.
(3) Two chapters (i.e. II and IV?) of the PV Alamkāra commentary by Prajñāka-
ragupta consisting of 18,000 sloka units of text.
(4) Two chapters of the PVin commentary by Dharmottara consisting of 12,000
sloka units of text.
(5) The Nyāyabindu of Dharmakirti
(6) The Purvapaksal samkşipti] of the Nyāyabindu, by Kamalasila.



(7) The Saptanäntarasiddhi of Dharmakirti, with the commentary of Samkaranan-
dana
(8) Many small treatises by JKänasri, such as:
(a) the "greater and lesser Kşanabhangadhyāya" (akad cia ma chechung
[could the "lesser" one be the Kşanabhagasiddhi of Ratnakirti?
(b) the Apohaprakarana? (gzhan sel dpyad pa)
(c) the "Trikapafícikacintā" (inga asum brtag pa)
(9) The Pramāṇasiddhi of Dharmottara
(10) The Alambanapariksi, mula and commentary, by Dignāga
From among the above,number 8 is particularly noteworthy because most of the
works of Jianasrimitra were not afterwards translated into Tibetan.
Studies with Samghasri
While studying under Säkyasri, Sa-pan also received instruction from one of
Säkyadri's foremost disciples, the Newar pandita Samghasri. This scholar was
famed for his great learning in the Candra tradition of Sanskrit grammar and the
Abhidharmakoda. However, he was also a master of Pranapa, and he taught the fol-
lowing works to Sa-pap:
(1) PV chapter 1, with the explanations of Manorathanandin combined with the
Pramanasamuccaya
(2) A commentary on chapter I of the pv, in 2,000 units of text [ by Samkara-
nandana?). Sa-pan translated and corrected this.
(3) The Vädanyāya of Dharmakirti, with the commentaries by both Santarakeita
and Sankaranandana. These Sa-pan is said to have both studied and
translated. 42
(4) The Hetubindu with the commentary of Arcata
In addition to the works listed above by Lho-pa, another of Sa-pap's disciples,
Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, states that Samghasri also taught Sa-pap the "small commenta-
ry of Dharmottara" (tahad ma chos mchog chung ba - which would be the latter's
commentary on the Nyāyabindu-and also the Lag si brda [?] of Jñānasri.
During Sa-pan's advanced researches too he may have received the assistance
of Sanghasri. For example, when Sa-paņ retranslated the PV he mainly worked with
Säkyasri. But as his colophon to the new translation mentions, there were also
others who helped, and Sayghasri very likely was one of these:



At a later time this text] was translated, edited and established by
the scholar who is without any rival on the face of the earth, the
great almsman (bsod snyoms pa chen po Sakyasribhadra and others (la
soge pa), and the Sākya bhikṣu Kun-dga'-rgyal-utshan-dpal-bzang-po.
Studies with Danasila
Danasila was a great dialectician (rtog se be chen po) from Varendra Jagad-
dala (the "Bharanta" of tho-pa) in eastern India. Among the nine lesser pandi-
tas in Säkyasri's party, he was the most famed as a master of Pramaņa. In parti-
cular, he was said to have been an expert in the commentaries of Dharmottara and
Prajñakaragupta. Sa-pan, however, did not study much under him. Lho-pa lists
the following treatises that the two worked on:
(1) Sambandhapariksa
(2) Vādanyāya with commentary [of Santarakṣitar]
(3) A few passages from the PV
(4) Some of Jhānasri's treatises
(5) Jitari's Balavatara tarka) and Sahalambananiyamaalddhi)
In addition, Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal mentions that Dānasīla taught Sa-paņ the Sapta-
näntarasiddhi with commentary of Sankaranandana.
These studies with Dünasila may have been the last of Sa-pan's investiga-
tions of Pramāņa under an Indian pandita for Lho-pa enumerated them at the very
end of his list of teachings Sa-pap received. (They are listed even after the
teachings received from such Tibetan masters as Brtsegs Dbang-phyug-seng-ge, Zhu
ston Rdo-rje-skyabs, and Spyi-bo-lhas-pa Byang-chub-'od.)
Studies with Brtsegs Dbang-phyug-seng-re
Sa-pan's final studies of Pramaņa under a Tibetan master were apparently
with Brtsegs-ston Dbang-phyug-seng-ge. Lho-pa describes him as an upholder of the
tradition of the writings of Phyva-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge (phyva pachos kvi seng
ge'i gsung rab si sgros "dzin pa). and actually refers to him by the name Phywa
Dbang-phyug-seng-ge." These studies with Brtsegs may have taken place after Sa-
pap's last contact with Sakyatri and Sanghasri (1.e. after c. 1213), since they
are introduced with the works "even after that" (de nas yang). However, this



chronology is by no means certain because Lho-pa lists all of Sa-pan's studies
with Zhu-ston (which some sources say began when Sa-pan was eighteen, 1... in
1200) after his studies with Brtsega. Sa-pan probably had a long relationship
with Zhu-ston since the latter participated in the ceremony of Sa-pap'a full
ordination in 1208 and at some point visited Sa-skya and gave a few teachings to
Sa-paņ there. But there is no indication that Sa-pan had such a long-term
relation with Brtsegs.
No precise details are in fact known about which works Sa-pap was taught by
Brtsegs. Lho-pa merely states that Sa-pan learned from him "Madhyamaka-Pramana
and the Dharmas of Maitreya" (dbu tshad dang byams chos). The later Sa-sky-pa
scholar Shakya-mchog-ldan (1428-1507) believed that Brtsegs was the most influen-
tial teacher in the formation of Sa-pan's opinions on Madhyamaka and siddhanta.
He also thought that Sa-pan studied the Summaries (of Phywa-pa or his successors)
with him, and that the place of their studies was in the upper Nyang valley.
During the time of his studies under Brtsegs, Sa-pan may have acted as a
sort of teaching assistant. When mentioning these studies, Lho-pa states that Sa-
pap studied these things to the point of mastery and then taught them to others
(mkhas parabyangs te gzhan la ston par byed pa). Nowhere else does Lho-pause
such a phrase.
Sa-pap's Translations of Works on Pramapa
One of Sa-pap's lasting contributions to Pramana studies in Tibet was his
retranslation of the PV. The original translation was the work of the translator
and monk Rma Dge-bal-blo-gros (fl. mid-11th c.) who worked on it with the Indian
pandita Subhūti&rlsanti. This team also translated the commentary of Devendra-
buddhi, and the same translator was also responsible for the rendering of Säkya-
mati's commentary. After Dge-ba'i-blo-gros, the next translator to work on the
PV was Rngog Blo-Idan-shes-rab (1059-1109), who apparently revised the earlier
version when translating the Pramăpavārttikālapkāra with the Kashmiri pandita
Bhavyarāja (Skal-Idan-rgyal-po). Sa-pan's own rendering was the last, and he
did it mainly under the guidance of Sakya ribhadra. Perhaps much of their work
was accomplished during the latter's stay at Sa-skya in 1210. As mentioned
above, however, Sa-pap also collaborated with other panditas, chief of whom was
probably Samghasri. This new translation was accepted by later generations as
their standard text of the PV, and it is found in all printed editions of the
Tanjur. 01



113
It may one day be feasible to assess in detail the contributions of Sa-skya
Pandita and his teachers in this work by comparing their rendering with the
versions of Rma and Rngog that are preserved in the commentaries which the latter
tvo translated. One would expect that Sa-pan's most significant changes were made
in chapter I, for this was the chapter he worked on most intensively with both
Sugatari and Sanghasri. Indeed, Sa-pap is said to have translated under their
guidance two commentaries on the first chapter. With Sugatasi he translated the
first chapter with a commentary of 3,500 units of text (presumably this vas
Dharnakirti's autocommentary). Later with Samghasri he studied chapter I with
the explanations of Manorathanandin combined with the PS, and also he both studied
and translated chapter I with a commentary in 2,000 units of text (by Sankara-
nandana?).63
During his studies with those two panditas he translated two or three other
Pramaya works. With Sugatari he is recorded to have translated the Tarkabhäga of
Mokşākaragupta. That is the first recorded translation of this work. The
translation that eventually made its way into the Tanjur, however, was done about
a century later. It was the work of Dpang lo-tsa-ba Bio-gros-brtan-pa (1276-
1342), who records in his colophon that he did it vithout the assistance of an
Indian pandita.
The last Pramāņa works that Sa-pap is said to have both studied and trans-
lated vere the Vadanyāya and its two commentaries, one by Santarakita and one
said to be by "the Brahmin," 1.e. by Sankaranandana. These he reportedly trans-
lated while studying with Samghasri. The Vādanyāya had already been translated in
the mid-11th century by Rma Dge-ba'i-blo-gros with Jūānasribhadra, and it had been
revised soon thereafter by Dar-ta-grags and Dipankara. The commentary by Santa-
rakṣita, the full title of which is Vādanyāyavsttib vipancitartha, was already
translated sometime in the late-11th century by Kumarasribhadra, "Phags-pa-shes-
rab, and Bro Seng-dkar Shakya-'od. Theirs is the version that was preserved in
the later editions of the Tanjur. Though there is no VN commentary by Samkara-
nandana either extant or known, a fragment of the commentary by Vinitadeva was
translated into Tibetan and preserved in the Tanfur. The name of the translator
of this fragment, however, is not given.
SEEDS



NOTES
The predominance of the PVin continued within Rngog's school and its
branches through the 14th century. But by the late-14th or early-15th century it
seems to have everywhere lost its place of preeminence to the PV.
This age (1.e. his "twentieth year" ) is given by Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-
rgyal-mtshan, p. 33a.6, and by [Ngor-chen?). Dpal sa skya, p. 589.5. Zhang, p.
437.4.4, states that his studies of the PVin (three times) and his teaching of it
from memory took place in his nineteenth year, 1.e, at age eighteen.
See also
A-mes-zhabs, Dzam gling, pp. 68.6 and 76.1 (34b.6 and 38.1).
Khetsun Sangpo, vol. 10, p. 122.
*Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-atshan, p. 33.5, seems to be the earliest
source for these details. See also [Ngor-chen?), Dpalaa skya, Lambras, p.
58a.5, and Rin-spungs-pa, p. 926.3.
Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtahan, p. 33a.5, states that he studied "the
Pramānasamuccaya, etc." Rin-spungs-pa repeated this, while [Ngor-chen?). Dpal sa
skya, P. 589.5, stated that Sa-pap studied at that time "a little Pramana too"
(tshad ma'ang bag tsam).
Olho-pa, p. 486.5.
'Zhang, p. 436.3.2: rtog se tshad ma'i gzhung/ rnam par nges pa zhal bya
shes rab sgron ma' phreng ba dang bcas partog ge tho ba atong thun dang bcas
pa/. I cannot identify the accompanying works. However, one of Mtshur's
teachers, Rma-bya Byang-chub-brtson-'grus, composed both a jika on the Tarkamud-
gara (MHTL 11326) and an Dbu ma stong thun (MHTL 11324). On the authorship of the
Tarkamudgara, cf. Paul Williams (1985), p. 270, note 8.
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Rngos lo, p. 453.4: nyang stod du brtsega dbang phyus
seng sedang/ tkyang dur, baszhon nu seng se la/ dbu tahad dang/ bedus pa
gsan/. See also Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, P. 39.1: rang lo bcu bdun pa
tsam nas rhan nges, badus pa dang bcas pa la esan sbyong dpyis phyin parmdzad/.
Shakya-mchog-ldan's dating of these studies is probably wrong.



Shakya-uchog-ldan, Rngog lo, p. 451.2.
"Lho-pa, p. 486.5: dge ba' bshes goyen et sang nag pa brtson grus seng se
shes bya basras dang. bcas pa'i sgros "dzin pa rigs par amra ba chen porkyang
'dur ba gzhon nu seng ge. The "chief disciple" (lit.: "son," sras was perhaps
Rma-bya-ba Byang-chub-brtson-'grus.
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Rngos lo, P. 453.2, relates that Sa-pan as a young
noble layman actually visited Gsang-phu and expounded the Pin there. However, he
is said not to have studied there because the main teacher at that time, Mnyal-
zhig, was difficult to study under: myal zhig sidus su/ s skya pandita io sras
Rzhon numar syur pas/ sang phur byon nas rnam nges gaunga shing/ bahad Rsor
ndzad bla mar os pa this dus kyang bsten dka! ba zhig "dug gsung ayal zhig
la masan. This account must be considered suspect since it is not supported by
any known early source. See also the mention of such expositions by the youthful
Sa-paņ in Shakya-mchog-Idan's Chos kyi 'khor, p. 465.5: nyang stod smad/ ne'u
thog dang/ bsan yas la sogs par bshad pa dang tham gzhag raya chen po mdzad/.
The account that follows is based on [Ngor-chen?), Dpal sa skya, Lam
'bras, pp. 588-58b. This account closely follows [Bo-dong pan-chen?). Lambras
bla ma'l. p. 542.3££, and may ultimately be based on the Lam 'bras history of Bla-
ma-dan-pa Bsod-nams-rgyal-mtshan.
Here than azhag "presentation" seems to mean the ceremonial offerings that
traditionally accompanied the first teaching. For occurrences of the term in
similar contexts, see Shakya-achog-ldan, Chos kys. 'khor, p. 465.6, and Dpal-ldan-
tshul-khrims, vol. ka, p. 199.2.
According to Yar-klungs-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-at shan, p. 330.6, Sa-pap learned
the PVin from Mtshur-ston at age 19 (1201) and hosted a great teaching-convocation
(chos 'khor) at the monastery of Gtsang Rkyang-thur. After that, when he was
going (back] from there, he met Säkyasribhadra at Gtsang Chu-mig!
de nas dgung lo nyi, shu bzhes pa'i dus//
mtshur ston chen po gzhon nu seng ge la//
bstan bcos tshad ma rnam nges esan nas ni//
gtsang 21 rkyang thur dge 'dun sde chen la//
chos 'khor chen po mdzad nas byon pa'i lam/
Igya gar kha che'i yul nas byon pa vi// [33]
yod smral, mkhan brgyud pap. chen shakya shri/?
et sang gi chu mig ces byar mjal nas kyang/
Still another account is given by Sa-pap's disciple Zhang Royal-ba-dpal, P.



116
437.4.4. According to the latter, Sa-pan expounded the PVin at the age of eigh-
teen (1200) having studied it three times.
But according to Zhang, p. 437.4.4, he had "heard it" thrice,
Alternatively: Mtshur "asked him to expound the teaching, repeating it
from the beginning."
See also above, note 11, for an account of his supposed exposition of the
PVin at Gsang-phu.
[Ngor-chen?), Dpal sa skya, P. 58b: rgya gar ayi bshad luge rang di
dra zhig yin anyam pa de dus nas ma byung gsung/. [Bo-dong). Lam 'bras bla ma,
p. 542.5: rgya gar ba'i shad (sic) lugs 'di min snyan pa de dus nas byung gsung/.
"Vor, according to Yar-klunga-pa Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, p. 33a.6, Sa-pan
was then going from Rkyang-thur to Sa-skya. See above, note 12, and also Sangs-
rgyas-phun-tshogs, Rtsom "phro, p. 293.5 (1479,5).
Regarding Säkyasri's visit to Tibet, see below, chapter 7, note 24.
These colorful details are supplied only by Dpal sa skya, p. 586.6. A
simpler version is found in (Bo-dong). Lam 'bras bla ma'i, p. 544. Yar-klungs-pa
Grags-pa-rgyal-mtahan, p. 33b, mentions only his meeting Säkyasri and studying the
conuentary of Dharmottara.
"Sa-pan is not known to have studied much Sanskrit by this time. However,
Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, p. 436.3.1, states that Sa-pan learned from his uncle Grags-
pa-rgyal-mtshan enough of an Indian vernacular to be able to converse, and became
Just barely able to understand religious teachings in Sanskrit, and even became
able to translate to a certain extent: phral skad reva gar skad dang lab btub pa
dang/ san skri ta yang chos so ba tsam 'gyur yang ci rigs pa mkhyen par balabs
sol.
In this connection one should also see Sa-pan's Yon tan sgrogs pali tshul
[read: tshal?) la bstod pa (also known as Ba gor bya ba'i sgra las bstod pa). Sa
skya pa'i bka' 'bum, vol. 5, p. 404.4.4, where Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan 1s
credited with teaching certain points of Sanskrit terminology:
grags pa rgyal mtshan gsung, gi man ngaz gi//
Ljes su brangs te kho bos rab rtogs pa//
According to the colophon, this was written when Sa-paņ was 21 years of age (1.e.



in 1203). It is noteworthy that three lines of this work are almost identical
vith three lines in the KhJ, part II. Here (D p.404.4.4) we have:
rcig las du ma du ma gcis syur zhing/l
du mas du marcia las rcig gi cha//
rkyen dang phrad na gzhan yang szhan 'gyur ba//
Compare Khu II 11 (D P. 97.4.2):
gcig la du ma du ma gcig 'syur zhing//
du ma du ma scia la gcig gi cha//
Tkyen dang phrad na gzhan dang gzhan 'gyur ba//
Lho-pa, p. 481.1, records that Grage-pa-rgyal-mtshan taught Sa-pap the Smra sro
mtahon cha of Smrti Jhanakirti, but he does not record the study of Sanskrit or
Indian vernaculars.
Usa-pap 18 said by Go-rams-pa to have received the title of papdita at
this time. Cf. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 100, note 290. (If so, perhaps it was
given partly ironically.) Yet in Sa-pap's earlier Rol mo'l. p. 80.2.6 (161a.6),
he already styled himself a "pandita." See also above, Introduction, note 17.
Lho-pa, Dpal Idan sa skya pandita'i rnam thar kun mkhyen rin chen dpal
gvis mdzad pa.
“Lho-pa, p. 565.6, states that Sa-pap was dvelling at Dgal-Idan, a remote
retreat in Dbu-ru'i Klungs Skyi-shod, when this biography was written. The debate
with Harinanda is mentioned on pp. 53a.3-54a.4. Unfortunately, the date of this
debate is not specified in the early sources. According to Sanga-rgyas-phun-
tshoga's Rt som "phro kha skong to Dkon-mchog-Thut-grub, Dam pa'i chon (p. 316.1),
the debate occurred when Sa-pan was 58 years old, i.e. in 1240. The place of the
debate vas Skyi-grong near the border of modern Nepal. [Zhu-chen). Dpal sa, P.
315.4.3, evidently mistakes the time of this debate with the time of the composi-
tion of the Ds. He says that the debate took place when Sa-pan was 50, 1.e. in
1232.
Sa-pan is also said to have been in Skyid-grong in 1238, when 'Phags-pa
was 3 years old. See Ibid., p. 316.3.3. The biography of 'Phaga-pa (1235-1280)
by Ye-shes-rgyal-mtshan (Bla ma dan pa), p. 1496.2, mentions that 'Phags-pa accon-
panied Sa-pap to Skyid-grong when the former was very young, but does not specify
the year of the journey.
Lho-pa is said to have been a disciple of Phywa-pa (d. 1169). See
Shakya-uchog-ldan, Rngog lo, p. 451.1, where Lho-pa is identified as Lho-pa sgog-



118
gzan, one of Phywa-pa's three disciples who were grouped together as the "three
intelligent persons" (shes rab can mi gaum). He is also said to have been known
as Lho-pa Dha-ra-seng. Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshogs, Rt som "phro, p. 319.2, seems to
identify him anachronistically as "Bhutanese": lho pa drug (='brug?1 pa yin. When
writing the blography he was "extremely old" (sku shin tu bagres pa).
*** Lho-pa, p. 55a.2: mtshungs pa med pa'i choa kyi. raval po di bahes anyen
dam pa li snyed cig bsten pa de dag phal che ba'i zhabs drung du bka! 'bange kyi
tha mar syur pa kho bo yang mchis te sdom brtson dam pa mkhas pa rnams kyi gtsug
rgyan du gyur pa bsod sa yoms pa chen po sras dang bcas pa de dag dang byang chub
sems dpa! kun nas brtse ba'i od kyi zhabs la sogs pa gang zhig bsnyen cing mchod
de bkur la gus pas brten pa de thams cad kyi rjes su brangs shing/ gal zhig si
lung tsam bdag gis kyang khums pa dang/ gang si tshe mtahan tsam kho bos mngon du
gyur pa de dag gis gaan pa'i ram grangs thams cad gtugs. shing yi gerbkod cing
'dris par byas pa vin te/ de tsam la yang gces par "dzin pa dang/ 'dun cing mos
la spro ba khyad par can yod pa dang/ yang bdag. cag gis mngon du syur pa'i gzhung
la soge pa razhtg chos kyl spyan du gyur pa nyid la xture shing nges par byas
pa vin pas na mdo tsam 'di bri bar aus kys/.
"Ibid., p. 49a.2. "Gos lo-tsa-ba identifies him as Kashmiri (see G.
Roerich [1976), p. 317 and J. Naudou [1980), p. 251).
<Bsod-nam-dpal-bzang-po, p. 3la.3: pandita sugatashri bya ba dbu ma dang
phar phyin la mkhas. Cf. Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs, Rtsom 'phro, p. 292.4 (146b):
dbu phar 1x mkhas pa su ga ta ahri. Cf. also G. Tucci (1949), vol. 3, p. 335.
Lho-pa, p. 49a.2. As cited by J. Naudou (1980), p. 251, Sugatasri was
also the author of the work Mahatma-kirtidhva jastotra (praises of Grags-pa-rgyal-
mtshan), Bstod tshogs section of the Narthang Tanjur.
*Ibid., p. 498.5: szhan de las tahad ma'i azhung luge gaan pa la/ rnam
grel le'u dang po'i 'grel pa stong phrag phyed dang bzhi pa gaan nas bsgyurcing
zhua/ slob dpon thar pa'i 'byung gnas kyis byas pa'i rtog geti skad ces bya ba'i
betan bcos esan cing baryur/ gzhan phyi rol gyi rig byed kyi tahad, ma drang srong
chen po szegs zan gyis sbyar ba'i rtog ge'i batan bcos rig (sic) pa zhes bya ba
esan pa rin no/l.
For the identification of this PV commentary as Dharmakirti's autocommenta-
ry, see S. Nishioka (1981), p. 67, no. 1010. In Bu-ston's index and the Tanjur
editions, the translator of the autocommentary on PV I is not specified. On the



119
Aloka units by which it and other prose texts were measured by Tibetans, see M.
Lalou (1953), pp. 314.
The Tarkabhāṣā was probably selected as the best available primer of Indian
Buddhist Pramiņa. Its author Mokşākaragupta intended it for "students" or "child-
ren." See the first verse in Kajiyama (1966), p. 23, and S. C. Widyabhusana
(1920), p. 347. The third text is referred to by Lho-pa as "The treatise on
dialectice called 'Nyāya' composed by the great Rși Kapäda." I understand this to
refer to the Nyaya Sūtras (read: riga pa instead of rig pa). However, some doubt
1s cast on this attribution by the mention of Kaņāda as author. The latter's work
would be the Valseșika Sūtras.
*But see [Ngor-chen?), Dpal sa, p. 59a.5, where it is specified that they
spent two years together in Sa-skya: chos riepas su ga tashri sa skyar dan
drange nas lo gayis su.... The chronology presented by this biography is not
always reliable, as mentioned in the following note.
[Ngor-chen). Dpal sa, p. 59a.6, however, states that he rejoined Sakyatri
and took full ordination at age twenty-four (1206): dgung lo nyi shu rtse Inga pa
la nyang smad rgyan gong gigtsug Lag (59b] khang du zer yang lo ston gyis bzhugs
1 yin pas dbu skra der bzhar ba ma stogs sdom pa nyung chung du blang. gsung bla
ma cha che bas mkhan po mdzad/ byang chub sems dpal spyi bo lhas pas las kyl slob
dpon dge bahes zhu khrul Asans ston mdzad nas dge 'dun raya mtsho lta bu'1 dbus su
bsnyen par rdzogs par ndzad nas/.
"Lho-pa, p. 496.2: de nas michas pa chen po de la guer dans dngul la soge
pa'l rin po che dang/ gos chen dang dar la sog8 pa na bza'i rige mang 29 dang/
gzhan zhabs 'bring ba la sogs pa rnan grange du mas mnyes par mdzad nas/.
$2on this place see A. Ferrari (1958), p. 60.
1 (ka),
p.
1785.4, mentions a
Lan 'bras slobbshad (Derge ed.), vol.
"Shangs kyi Rin-chen-sgang."
StSangs-rgyas-phun-tshogs, Rtsom "phro, p. 295 (148a), and G. Tucet (1949).
vol. 3, p. 336. According to Gzhon-nu-dpal, Säkyasri also returned briefly to
Dbus in 1212 to gather donations for building the giant Khro-phu Maitreya. See G.
Roerich (1976), P. 1070. Other chronological data on Sakyasri's stay in Tibet is
given in Bu-ston's Chos byung. See A. Vosteikov (1970), p. 111, n. 341.



120
Lho-pa, p. 496.5: de nyid kyi thad du yun ring du bzhugs shing. Ljes su
"brangs te/
>Ibid., pp. 496.6-50a.3.
The Alambanapariksā is mentioned on p. 50b.1.
The third work by Jianasrl referred to here is probably the Karyakarana-
bhāvasiddhi, which deals with the trikapancakacinta (Inge geum brtags pa)as I
was informed by Prof. K. Mimaki. On this work see Y. Kajiyama (1963). On the
"greater and lesser Ksapabhangadhyāya," see the following note.
Twelve works of Jñanafrimitra were recovered from Tibet in the original
Sanskrit. See A. Thakur ed., Ratnakirtinibandavall, Tibetan Sanskrit Works
Series, vol. 3 (1957), and K. Mimaki (1976), p. 4. The Kşanabhahgādhyāya is the
longest of these works. Jänasrimitra is not known to have written a shorter work
on the topic, but his disciple Ratnakirti did write a much shorter work Kapa-
bhangasiddhi, which was actually two works, one the Anvayatmika and the other the
Vyatirekõtmika. These were published in A. Thakur ed. (1957), pp. 62-76, 77-88.
An earlier edition of the last two works was edited by H. Shastri in Six Buddhist
Nyāya Tracts in Sanskrit, Bibliotheca Indica, New Series no. 185 (1910). On these
works see K. Mimaki (1976), pp. 4 et passim.
Lho-pa, p. 510.3: yang gnas skabs de ayid du....
period when he was studying for a long time with Säkyaári.
This refers to the
*UBsod-nam-dpal-bzang-po, p. 311.3: pandita sapghashrl bya basara candra
pa dang mngon pa mdzod la mkhas. Cf. G. Tucci (1949), vol. 3, P. 335: "Safghasrl
[who was learned in the Candravyākaraga both ancient and recent." Cf. also
Sangs-rgyas-phun-tahogs, Rt som 'phro, p. 292.5 (1466.5): tsandra la mkhas pa sa
gha shri/.
commen-
***In the editions of the Tanjur the translator of Sankaranandana's
tary is not named.
"In the editions of the Tanjur, the commentary by Santarakṣita was trans-
lated by Kumära ribhadra, 'Phags-pa-shes-rab, and 'Bro Seng-dkar Shakya-'od. Both
Narthang and Peking Tanjurs contain two copies of this work, though they are
substantially the same. See A. Vostrikov (1935), p. 10, note 40, and p. 31. See
also D 4239 and P 5725 and 5738.



No commentary by "the Brahmin" (Sankaranandana) is known. There is, how-
ever, an incomplete Vādanyāyavyakhya by Vinitadeva. The translator of the latter
is not specified. See D 4240 and P 5737. See also A. Vostrikov (1935), p. 10,
note 40.
43Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, p. 437.2.1.
44Dharmakārti, Pramīgavärttika. Tib.: Tshad marnom 'rrel, Derge ed.
(Tokyo: 1981), Tshad ma, vol. 1, p. 76.1.7 (ce 1513.7):
dus phyis sa'1 stene na gran zla thams cad dang bral ba'i mkhas pe
bsod anyons Pachen po shakya shri bhadra la sors pa trams dang/
shakya'i dre slong kun dga' rgyal mtshan dpal bzang pos bagyurcing
zhus te gtan la phab palo/
"Lho-pa, p. 526.5: shar phyoga bha ranta't popdita ftor Re ba chen po dana
shi la zhes bya ba las/. As cited by Y. Kajiyana (1966), P. 11, Danasila is
identified in the Cordier catalogue (Rgyud, xxvi, 50) as being from Varendra-
jagaddala (or Jagaddhala Vihara of Bengal). This may have been one and the same
place as the Jagaddala of Odivaşa to which Šakyasri fled in 1202, though this is
by no means certain. See D. D. Kosambi and V. V. Gokhale eds. (1957), P. xxxv11,
note 7, and Y. Kajiyana (1966), P. 11, note xxv.
**Bsod-name-dpal-baang-po, p. 31b: pandita dānashila bya ba tshad ma rgyan
dans chos mchog la mkhas. Cf. G. Tucci (1949), vol. 3, p. 335: "Danasila [who was
learned] in logic." Cf. also Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshogs, Rtson phro, p. 292.5
(146b.5): tshad ma la khas pa da na shi la/. Cf. E. Oberwiller tr. (1931), p.
222€.
*Lho-pa, p. 525.6. Sahalambananirnaya siddhi) attributed to Prajākara-
gupta also exists. See L. van der Kuijp (1979), p. 421, note 11.
48Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, p. 437.2.3.
49.ho-pa, p. 510.3.
5° Ibid.
"Lho-pa lists Sa-pan's studies with Zhu-ston next,
1.e. on Pp. 510.4-
52a.2.



[Ngor-chen?), Dpal sa, p. 595.1: slob dpon dge bshes zhu hrul gyis esang
ston mdzad nas. For more of this passage see above, note 30. Lho-pa, p. 525.1,
mentions Zhu-ston's teachings as Sa-skya as including the Madhyāntavibhahga and
the Dharmadharmatavibhaga: 'byed rnam pa gayis la sogs pagal zhig ni dge ball
bahes gnyen de dpal sa skya nyid du gdan drangs nas esan pa yin no//.
53Lho-pa, p. 510.3.
Shakya-achog-ldan, Dbu ma'i, p. 232. See also Thu'u-bkwan, Grub mtha',
p. 201.
Shakya-nchog-Idan, Rngog lo, p. 453.4: nyang stod du brtsege dbang phyug
seng ge dang/ rkyang dur ba gzhon nu seng ge la/ dbu tahad dang bsdus pagsan.
The studies with Brtsegs are thus mentioned in the same sentence as his studies
with Rkyang-'dur-ba.
56Lho-pa, p. 510.4.
5 Derge Tanjur (Tokyo: 1981). Tshad ma, vol. 1 (ce), p. 151a.2: rgya gar
gvi mkhan po su bhūti shri shanti dang/ bod kyi lo tså ba dge slong dee bali blo
gros kyls bsgyur. Rma Dge-ba'1-blo-gros flourished in the mid-11th century. Two
of his patrons were Lha-btsun Zhi-ba-'od and Khri-bkra-shis-mnga'-bdag Rtse-ide-
btsan. See below, note 66.
°cf. the bagyur byang of Rngog lo-tsa-ba's translation of the Pramäpalam-
kara: Derge Tanjur (Tokyo: 1981), Tshad ma, vol. 1 (ce), p. 151a.2:
dpal ldan dam pa'l las lamngon dges pa/?
smad med che bali bdag can rgval po mchos//
dge ba'i thugs mngal des pa sa skyong ba//
mi yi bdag po dbang sde'i bkas bskul nas//
brtson Idan lhag par dpyod Idan 'chad po dang//
nyan po rgol dang phyir sgol don nges dury//
'brel gtam dga' ston rgya chen myong ba'i phyir//
"dzam aling mkhas pa'i ryan gyur rakan di bagyur//
Ita ngan kun sel enyis su med pa vi//
don dam rnam dpyod lhur len bstan bcos 'di//
szhan mang don dka' sgrub par dana yang//
'bras bu che phyir 'bad per rigs pa yin//
log pa'i rayun phyoge rjes su azhol gyur ya/



123
1ta ba chu bo bzlog par dka' mod kvi//
yang dag rig pas legs par brda sprad na//
'sa' yi Yid la ci ste 'bab mt 'gyur//
agra don gnyi sa nyams su bder lon te//
mun sprul syis ni ma balad legs bsgyur ba/
angon syi sgyur byed dam pa de dag si//
dri tsam bro ba da 1ta kho bo tsam//
dpal ldan kha che'i rig pa ba'i//
etsug gi nor bu skal ldan ni//
rgyal po zhes bya la thos nas//
blo ldan bzang po 'di bsgyur roll
grong khyer chen po dge med kyi shar phyogs na yul "khor lo dzin pa
zhes bya ba// grub pa'i gnas su grags pa'i 'dabs/ tam par rgyal bali
zhing zhes bya bar/ kha che'l pandita chen po skal Idan rgyal po dang
bod kyi. lo tså ba chen po dge slong blo ldan shes rab kyis begyur ro//.
The retranslation of the PV must date to between 1208, when Sakyasri
returned to Gtsang from Dbus and ordained Sa-pan, and 1212 or 1213, when Säkyasri
left Gesang for Mnga'-ris. Perhaps much of the work was done in the summer of
1210, when Säkyasri spent the rainy-season retreat in Sa-skya. Beod-nam-dpal-
bzang-po, p. 500.3, mentions the translation work of Sa-pap as follows: lo tsa
bas yongs te po sti thams cad khro phur gdan drangs s/de'i tshe sa skyar chos
rle pa nyid kyis dpal dus kyi 'khor lo dang/ 'dul ba dang/ sgra dang/ snyan
ngar dang/ tahad ma dang/ mngon pa la sogs pa'i chos mang du gsungs/ chosete
sa skya pandita de nyid kyi lo tsa mdzad nas/ sa skya'i gtsug lag khang du (Sla]
tahad ma rnam grel la sore pa'i 'gyur yang mdzad do/. In the short time avail-
able to me at Patna, I was not able to determine the date that the passage refers
to. On p. 496.5, however, there is a reference to the consecration of the Khro-
phu Byams-chen in the water-male-monkey year (1212), and the same date is men-
tioned on p. 546.1. See also Khro-phu lo-tsa-ba (Bihar Research Society no.
981), p. 189.4, where Sa-pan's retranslation of the PV at Sa-skya'i-gtsug-lag-
khang with Säkyasri is also briefly mentioned.
In the Derge edition of the collected works of Sa-pan, pp. 427.1.2-428.2.3,
there is a short work entitled Rang gis rang la gros "debs pa. This purports to
be a record of thoughts that occurred to him on the occasion of Sakyasribhadra's
stay at Sa-skya during that rainy-season retreat (p. 428.2.1):
tshul 'di pap chen sa skya'i nang tshan du//
dbyar bzhugs byas tshe sems la shar ba't gtam//
The colophon (p. 428.2.3), however, states: kun dga' rgyal mtshan dpal bzang pos



124
shing ro byi ba'le gro bzhin zla ba'i tshes brgyad pa bris/. "This was written
by Kun-dga'-rgyal-mtshan-dpal-bzang-po on the eighth day of the Gro-bzhin (1.e.
the seventh) lunar month of the wood-male-mouse year (1204)." This date is ana-
chronistic. Sa-pap had not received the "dpal-bzang-po" ending to his name until
his later full ordination, and he was by no means a translator (lo tså ba) then,
though the text requires this--he regularly addresses himself as "translator" in
it. It is also unusual for Sa-pan to date his compositions. Thus the colophon
and the work itself are of doubtful authenticity.
It is definite that Sākyasri spent a rainy-season retreat in Sa-skya in the
year 1210, the iron-male-horse year. Sa-pap states this in his biography of Rje-
btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-utshan, Rje btsun, Lam 'bras slob bshad (Derge ed.), vol. 1
(ka), p. 289.5. See also the other edition of the work, entitled Bla me tje
btsun chen po'i rnam thar, SKKB, vol. 5, p. 148.1.4. This date is also supported
by the Ngor chos 'byung, as cited by G. Tucci (1949), vol. 2, p. 336.
Cf. also S. C. Das in his introduction to his and H. M. Vidyabhushana's
edition of kşenendra's Bodhisattvavadana-Kalpalatã or Avadāna-kalpalată, Biblio-
theca Indica. 1888-1912. Das stated that Sakyatri met Sa-pap in 1202 and pre-
sented him a Sanskrit manuscript of that work, as cited by P. L. Vaidya ed.
(1959), pp. vii and X.
For the colophon, which mentions "others" (sogs), see above, note 44.
Cf. E. Obermiller tr. (1931), pp. 222€, where Bu-ston mentions Sa-pap's studies of
the PV only with Sākyasri and Danasila.
Tshad ma, vol. 1, p.
See for instance the Derge Tanjur (Tokyo: 1981).
946-151a, and the Peking Tanjur, vol. 130, pp. 78-102.
For this identification of the commentary, see S. Nishioka (1981), p. 67,
no. 1010. The same identification was also made by L. van der Kuijp (1979), p.
409, presumably on the basis of Go-rams-pa's Rige sterdkalnas. The autocom-
mentary comes to some 131 folios in the Peking edition.
This identification was also made by L. van der Kuijp (1979), p. 409.
See the above note. The length of this work in the Peking edition (5717[a]) 18
only 131 folios.
"The Tarkabhaga is still extant in Sanskrit and has been published twice.
For references to these editions and for an annotated translation, see Y. Kajiyana
(1966).



125
Peking Tanjur, Gtan tahigs rig pa, vol. ze, p. 399a, 1 (vol. 138, p.
132.2.1): tshul 'di ni gang zag daw pa rnams kyi bkal drin la brten nas nang dang
phyi'i gzhung luge du ma rnama la blo'i snang ba cher rayas pa sgra bsgyur lo tsa
badpang dge slong dpal ldan blo gros brtan pas pandita la ma bitos par rang nyid
kyis begyur cing zhus te gtan la phab palo//.
Peking Tanjur, Gtan tshigs rig pa, vol. ce, p. 400a.5 (vol. 130, p.
162.2.5): dpal lha btsun zhi ba 'od kyi zhal snga nas dang/ dpal lha btsan po
khri bkra shis mnga' bdag. Itse lde btsan syi zhal snga nas kyis bkas/ rgya sar
Ryl. mkhan po chen po inyāna shri bhadra'i zhal snga nas dang/ dge slong dge ba'i
blo gros kyis bagyur cing zhus te gtan la phab palo// // slad kyis kyang pandita
chen po dhi pang kara dang/ lo tsa ba dge slong dar ma erags kyis zhus shing Rtan
la phab pa'o// 11.
Kumarabri and 'Phags-pa-shes-rab flourished in the late-llth and possibly
early-12th century. They revised Rngog's translation of the PV Alapkāra. See J.
Naudou (1980), p. 231. 'Phags-pa-shes-rab himself also worked with some of the
same panditas as had Mar-pa and Rngog. See Ibid., p. 215.
On the extent of this commentary see A.
"See D no. 4240, P no. 5737.
Vostrikov (1935), p. 10, note 40.



11
,
1
,0
00元
10
.
11
2011
1
00
|
|
(10)
中
| |
一月
一一一一一一一一一
一一一一一
上一



Chapter 6
SA-SKYA PANDITA'S CAREER AS A SCHOLAR OF PRĀMAŅA:
HIS WRITINGS AND THE LINEAGES HE ESTABLISHED
Sa-pan's longest and most detailed treatment of Pranapa was his Tshad ma
rigs pa' gter (Rigs gter with its autocommentary. This was also for the most
part his final statement on the subject. The only other place where he discussed
subjects related to Pranapa at length was the final section of the KhJ, though his
main topics there were the procedures and presuppositions of philosophical debate.
In the Riga gter, by contrast, he attempted to synthesize and summarize the whole
of Dignåga and Dharmakirti's theory of epistemology and logic.
Rngog Lo-tsa-ba, the Father of
Tibetan Pramāpa Literature
The Rige ster was in many ways original among Tibetan treatises on Pramana,
but it was also shaped by and indeed to some extent belonged to a century-old
Tibetan tradition of Pramana scholarship. One of Sa-pap's great forerunners in
Tibet was Rngog lo-tsa-ba B10-1dan-shes-rab (1059-1109); in fact, the tradition of
composing Tibetan treatises on Pramana originated with the latter. According to
the list of Rngor's writings preserved in Bu-ston's history of religion, he wrote
topical summaries (badus don) on the following Pranapa works:
(1) Pramāpaviniscaya, with its commentary by Dharmottara
(2) Nyāyabindu, with its tika by Dharmottara
(3) Pramāpavarttike, with its Alapkāra commentary by Prajñakaragupta
(4) Pramapapariksa (of Dharmottara)
(5) Anyapohaprakarapa (of Dharmottara)
(6) Kşanabhangasiddhi (of Dharmottara)
(7) Apohasiddhi (of Sankaranandana)
(8) Pratibandhasiddhi (of Samkaranandana)
Kagog's expositions of the summarized meaning (badus don) of these works were
perhaps topical outlines of the sort that are now more commonly known as sa bcad.
It is worth noting that these summaries were written precisely on those Pramapa
treatises which Rngog lo-tsa-ba himself had translated. Perhaps he composed them



128
while engaged in the work of translating the basic texts.
Rngog's other Pramana commentaries listed by Bu-ston were not summaries or
outlines but were subcommentaries (rnam bahad : vyakhya) in which the explanations
and discussions of earlier commentaries were further elucidated. In addition to
some incomplete commentaries, he wrote complete subcommentaries on the following:
(1) Pramāpaviniscaya, with the tika by Dharmottara
(2) Nyāyabindu, with the tikā by Dharmottara
These two subcommentaries were an important help for his disciples who became the
next generation of teachers in the school he founded. It is probably no coinci-
dence that active lineages of teaching and study became established especially for
the PVin and the Nyayabindu (NB) with the commentaries of Dharmottara.
Thus Rngog composed two types of Pramana treatise as means for expounding
Indian basic works or their commentaries. In writing his two subcommentaries
(rnam bahad) he followed a well-established Indian comentarial type, being one of
the first Tibetan scholars known to have done so. But for his topical outlines
(badus don he utilized a typically Tibetan type which had no clear predecessor in
Indian Buddhist literature.
By composing such commentaries on Pramāņa as well as on many other sub-
jects, Rngog is said to have initiated among Tibetans the practice of composing
treatises on a grand scale.' Unfortunately only very few of Rngog's writings are
now extant, and even in the 15th century only a handful were available. Among
his Pramana writings listed above, seemingly only the subcommentary on the Prama-
paviniscayatika was still available to Shakya-mchog-Idan at the end of the 15th
century. (Shakya-uchog-Idan also mentions a "great subcommentary," but this was
probably identical with Rngog's rnam bahad on Dharmottara's tikā.) From among
Rngog's other works, apparently not many were still available even in the 15th
century, 10
Rngog's Successors and the Bsdus-pa Literature
Rngog 18 not known to have written any independent treatise on Pramana in
which he expounded the general subject according to a heuristic plan of his own
devising. This innovation apparently did not take place for a generation or two.
Perhaps the first such general thematic exposition of Pranaſa was the work of
Rgya-dmar-ba Byang-chub-grags (fl. c. 1130), a junior student of Rngog who also
studied under Khyung Rin-chen-grags and Gangs-pa She'u. According to A-khu-chin



129
Shes-rab-rgya-mtsho's list of rare books, Rgya-dmar-ba wrote several "Summaries of
Pramana" (tshad malt badus pa). Though nothing definite is known about these
works, they may have served as the prototype for the famous Summary (badus pa) of
Rgya-dmar-ba's chief disciple, Phywa-pa. If so, Rgya-dmar-ba's Summaries were
general introductions to the most important concepts and practices
In that case their author would have been the originator of the bsdus pa genre
which was further developed by Phywa-pa and Gtsang-nag-pa, and which continued to
be employed centuries later.
Shakya-ochog-ldan, however, does not mention any original Summary by Rgya-
dmar-ba, and instead gives the latter's student Phywa-pa Chos-seng full credit for
this innovation. Though Phywa-pa is said to have composed a commentary on the
PVin and quite a few other commentarial works, his most influential treatise was
his "Summary," an independent work known as the Tshad ma badus pa vid kyi mun
sel. Apparently it consisted of a basic work (probably in mnemonic verse) with
an autocommentary. There may also have been a very brief synopsis or outline."
Though unfortunately this work is not known to be extant, it seems to have been a
restatement of certain key points of Pramana according to a subject order and
expository method of its author's invention. It was apparently the general intro-
ductory text he and his students used, and it determined much of the terminology
and style of classroom debate for many generations of Tibetan dialecticians.
In addition to his Pramāpa Summary (tshad ma badus pa). Phywa-pa is also
said to have written a greater and lesser Madhyamaka Summary (dbu ma badus pa).
This was probably an introduction to the dialectics of the Madhyamaka, presenting
Playwa-pa's own unique approach. One can speculate that the work addressed a
number of basic topics, presenting them in a series of connected inferences or
logical entailments.
Phywa-pa is thus traditionally held to have been the innovator of a truly
Tibetan school of dialectics. Though his and his teacher's works are now lost and
largely forgotten, indirectly these scholars exercised a great influence over
Tibetan Pramaņa studies down to the present. The basic topics to be taught in the
introductory classes of dialectics, for instance, was probably first determined by
Phywa-pa or his teacher. Klong-rdol bla-ma asserts that several topics of the
novice class in logic go back to Phywa-pa. Even the name for such classes,
badus grwa or badus rwa, would seem originally to have referred precisely to the
school or class (lit. "enclosure" or "courtyard" grwa) in which the Pramana Summa-
ry (tahad ma badus pa) was taught, and the modern bsdus grwa textbooks themselves
are probably the distant lineal descendants of the early Pranāņa Summaries.
One important specific contribution of Phywa-pa to Tibetan Pramāṇa was his
systematic employment of formal arguments involving the triad of definition



(mtshan nyid), term to be defined (mtshon bya), and the thing exemplifying the
term and definition (mtshan gzhi). Before Phywa-pa, these concepts and their
employment seem not to have been worked out in detail. Still another legacy
that Phywa-pa is said to have left for later Tibetan scholasticism is the practice
of expounding a scriptural passage or doctrinal point by means of a chain of
consequences (indicated by the word thal) and reasons indicated by the word
phyir). Phywa-pa presumably employed this style of exposition in his Summaries.
This expository method was adopted wholesale much later in the obligatory manuals
(yig cha) of the great Dge-lugs-pa scholastic colleges (grva tahang).
Phywa-pa's Pramāņa Summary continued to be studied within the Rngos
school, though some of his students disagreed on certain points and composed
Pramana Summaries of their own. Dan-'bag-pa Smra-ba'i-seng-ge, for instance,
wrote a Tshad ma badus pa." Though doctrinally he departed from some of Phywa-
pa's interpretations, he presumably followed the same general structure and expo-
sitory method as his teacher. Meanwhile other students of Phywa-pa continued to
employ the Summary as a commentarial or propaedeutic genre for Madhyamaka, though
no doubt with many radical differences from Phywa-pa's doctrine. Gt sang-nag-pa
Brtson-'grus-seng-ge and Rma-bya Byang-chub-brtson-'grus, for instance, were stu-
dents not only of Phywa-pa but also of Pa-tahab lo-tsa-ba, the original propagator
of Candrakirti's Präsangika in Tibet. Each of them is said to have written
Madhyamaka Summaries (dbu ma'i bsdus pa). Gtsang-nag-pa wrote both an expanded
and abridged Summary, while Rma-bya is only known to have written one Madhyamaka
Summary (the latter also wrote an Dbu wa stong thun, which was perhaps similar in
general content but different in presentation).*
The tradition of writing Summaries continued into the 13th century and
beyond. Rgyal-sras Chu-nig-pa, the foremost disciple of the Gsang-phu Ne'u-thog
master Mnyal-zhig (fl. 1200) is recorded to have composed a (Tshad ma) badus pa.
Even two of Sa-pan's students wrote Summaries. Sa-pan's greatest disciple in the
field of Pranāņa, "U-yug-pa Rigs-pa'i-seng-ge (d. 1253), is said to have written
such a work; it was entitled Bedus pa riga sgrub. Another of his disciples
Rong-pa Rgwa-lo Rnam-rgyal-rdo-rje (1203-1282) also composed one, which is listed
by A-khu-chin Shes-rab-rgya-mtsho as the Tshad ma bsdus pa chen mo (MHTL 11816).“
He also composed a Madhyamaka Summary (MHTL 11374). One cannot be sure whether
these works reflected the views of Sa-paņ or whether they were holdovers from
their authors' previous studies in the school of Phywa-pa and his followers. In
any case, the Summary as a form of propadeutic writing continued to have fol-
lowers. According to A-khu-chin, Pramāņa Summaries were later composed by Chims
Jam-dpa'1-dbyangs (MHTL 11818) and Bo-dong Pag-chen Phyogs-las-rnam-rgyal (MUTL
11845). Indeed, it seems likely that some of those Summaries were intermediaries
25



131
in the development of the earliest dialectical manuals into the textbooks sti
used in the badus grva classes of modern Tibetan Buddhist seminaries.co
Sa-pan and His Tshad ma rigs pa'i gter
When Sa-pan began his studies of Pramāņa in the lineage of Phywa-pa and
Gtsang-nag-pa, he was thus taking part in a flourishing and well-developed tradi-
tion. Later, when he perceived various errors and discrepancies in that tradition
through his studies under Indian panditas, he decided to refute the main devia-
tions from Indian tradition. His primary vehicle for doing this was his Tshad ma
riga paligter (Rigs gter) with its autocommentary, which together form by far the
longest work in his oeuvre.29
Though Sa-pan's principal ain in the Rigs gter was to correct the teach-
ings of his Tibetan predecessors, the form which he employed for this purpose
was probably determined in part by the writings of those very opponents. The Riga
gter too was a Summary of sorts." It may not have followed the same expository
method as the writings of Phyva-pa and his followers, but it was a general intro-
duction to Pranāņa by way of a brief treatment of its key concepts. One very
important difference between the Rigs gter and its predecessors was that the Rigs
gter included more within the scope of its summary: it sought to comprehend the
basic work of Dignāga together with all seven of the major treatises of Dharma-
kirti. The most significant new source that Sa-pap took into account was the PV;
up until this time Tibetan Pramāņa had taken as its main Indian sources merely the
PVin and Nyayabindu with Dharmottara's commentaries.
Sa-paņ divided the Rigs gter into eleven chapters, each of which addressed
a major topic in Pranana. Several of these--such as spyi and bye breg sal and
"brel, mtshan nyid and mtshon bya, and azhal sel--had already been the subjects of
discussion of Phywa-pa and the others in their Summaries. The final four chap-
ters of the Rigs gter discuss the same topics as the four chapters of the Pv, viz.
pranapa, pratyakşa, svärthanumana, and parārthanumana. The overall plan of the
work (following the pagination of the Rigs gter rang 'rrel. Derge edition, Toyo
Bunko reprint) is as follows:
1. shes bya spyi Idog nas tan la dbab pa (The ascertainment of knowable things
according to general conceptual categories)
A. shes bya'i yul (The object which is to be known) (chapter 1: pp. 167.4.3-
172.2.2)



132
B. shes byed kyi blo (Cognition, which is the knower) (chapter 2: Pp.
172.2.2-176.1.6)
C. blo des yul rtoga, pa'i tahul (The manner in which that cognition under-
stands the object)
1. spyi dang bye brag rtogs pa'i tahul (How the general and particular
are understood) (chapter 3: pp. 176.1.6-179.1.3)
2. sgrub pa dang szhan sel bas rtogs tshul (How one understands through
proof and the exclusion of others) (chapter 4: pp. 179.1.3-187.1.3)
3. briod bye dang br fod byed rtogs pa'i tahul (How the thing expressed
and the expression are understood) (chapter 5: pp. 187.1.3-190.2.4)
4. 'brel ba dang gal ba rtogs pa'i tshul (How logical connection and
inconsistency are understood)
a. brel badpyad pa (The investigation of logical connection)
(chapter 6: pp. 190.2.6-201.1.5)
b. Igal ba't don nges par bya ba (Ascertainment of the meaning of
inconsistency) (chapter 7: pp. 201,1.5-204.1.1)
II. shes byed tahad ma'i rang bzhin nges par bya ba (Ascertainment of the nature
of the means of knowledge, the knower)
A. mtshan nyid kyl rham azhag (The system of definition (esp.. the definition
of Pramānal) (chapter 8: pp. 204.1.1-219.3.6)
B. ntshan zhi so soli don gtan la dbab pa (Settling the sense of the indivi-
dual exemplifications (of the definition])
1. dngon sum (Direct perception) (chapter 9: pp. 219.3.6-230.3.6)
2. tjes dpag (Inference)
a. rang don Ljes su dpag pa la brtags pa (The consideration of
inference for oneself) (chapter 10: pp. 230.3.6-251.4.1)
b. szhan don .fes su dpag pa la brtags pa (The consideration of
inference for others) (Chapter 11: pp. 251.4.1-264.1.4)
To expound these subjects Sa-pan gathered together the passages on the same sub-
ject from the different works of Dignāga and Dharmakirti, and presented them
according to his own plan."
The Mkhas jug on Pramāpa
The second and only other extant work in which Sa-pan discusses Pramana in
any detail was the Khu, his primer of scholarly methods. This work was one of
Sa-pan's longest treatises, though less than one-third of it was devoted to



133
subjects related to Pramana. The relevant part was the third main chapter or
section (le'w), which deals with the practical application of Pramana in debate
and philosophical discussion.
The contents of this section will be investigated below in more detail.
Still, one should note here to begin with that the KhJ apparently was composed
later than the Rige ster. Thus when Sa-pan composed the Khu, he seems to have
already treated some of the same topics in his Rigs gter. In Pramana, debating
belongs in general to the category of "inference for others" (gahan don cies dpar:
pararthanumana)-1.e. formal argumentation--and Sa-pan had made this the subject
of his last chapter in the Rigs gter. In the KhJ, Sa-pan usually took the oppor-
tunity to discuss new topics not already expounded in detail in the Rise ater.
But one subject he naturally could not avoid taking up again was the question of
what constituted occasions of defeat and victory in debate. For this he quotes in
the KhJ several basic verses from the Rigs gter and then refers the reader to the
Rigs gter for more details. Another question he returns to in the Kh is what
answers should be given in reply to arguments phrased in the form of necessary
consequences (prasahga). Here the hj contains a slightly longer account of the
four acceptable answers, and Sa-pap adds brief examples of what sort of statements
by the opponent would warrant each answer. There are several other passages in
both works where he discusses the same topics.
In the Khy, however, Sa-paņ mainly addresses general problems relating to
debate or philosophical discussion, and not specific problems of logic or inferen-
tial reasoning. He discusses some of the key underlying
and Tibetan dialecticians had to face, such as: What is the place of scripture in
debate? To what extent must one hold tenets or advance a thesis in debate? And
how can two debators from different philosophical schools find a common ground for
discussion? His answers to such questions shed important light on his doctrinal
and philosophical thought. Thus, though this section of the KhJ is significant
for revealing Sa-pan's opinions on some aspects of Pramaņa, it also deserves to be
classed together with the Sdom sum rab dbye and Thub paldgonge sal as one of
his most important statements on Buddhist philosophy and doctrine.
Sa-pan's Influence on the subsequent Study
of Pramana in Tibet
Sa-pan's central importance in later Tibetan scholasticism is obvious from
the simple fact that he originated all existing Tibetan lineages of PV studies.
It is said that as a teacher he laid special emphasis on expounding the PV:



according to some accounts, he made a special vow to teach at least one lesson on
the PV every day for as long as he lived. Moreover, there is no doubt that in
his long and influential career as a teacher he gave instructions on the PV to nu-
merous students on very many occasions.
Shakya-mchog-Idan describes in some detail the results of Sa-pan's energe-
tic propagation of the study of the PV:
To briefly express the manner in which many religious teachers who
upheld the Doctrine appeared and how numerous religious seminaries that
maintained the exposition lineage were established as a result of the
great teachings given by the Sa-skya-pas . .. In particular (the
following upholders of the teaching lineages of the religious scrip-
ture and of the PV appeared:
U-yug-pa composed his Rnam bshad rise mdzod and Badus pe rige
sgrub. These were famed as the first (Tibetan) commentaries of the
PV tradition. It is widely renowned that [Sa-pan's) direct disciples
who had expert knowledge of the PV were (1) Te-ra-ba Byans-ngon, (2)
Ldong-ston Shes-rab-dpal, (3) Dkar Shakya-grags, (4) Shar-pa Shes-rab-
'byung-gnas, (5) Nags-phug-pa Shes-rab-'od-zer, and (6) Lho-pa kun-
mkhyen. Afterward there appeared Rgya (Skya 1.e. "Jan-dbyangs-sky-
bo?), Nor (1.e. Nor-buang-dpal] and Bya [?]. And also: Nya Dar-ma-rin-
chen, Nya-dbon Kun-dga' -dpal, and the two lords of learning G.yag [-
ston Sangs-rgyas-dpal] and [Red-ada'-ba) Gzhon (-nu-blo-gros), who are
as widely famed as the sun and moon. This is just to indicate some of
then 41
Shakya-mchog-Idan also mentions several of the main seminaries of Dbus and
Gtsang in which the PV was taught according to the Sa-skya-pa tradition and in
which the Summary (badus pa, here the basic or introductory class on dialectics)
vas maintained in accordance with the Rigs gter:
(1) Bo-dong E, founded by Dpang lo-tsa-ba (1276-1342) as a seminary for the
study of the PV and As..
(2) Ngam-ring-gi-chos-grwa, founded in 13542) by the Dpon-chen Byang-pa.
(3) Buang-ldan, founded by Kun-spangs Chos-grags-dpal-bzang.
(4) Shel-dkar chos-ade, founded (in 1385) by Si-tu Chos-rin-dpal (d. 1403)
[and Paq-chen Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan (1353-1420?)].46
(5) Rtse-thang-gi-chos-grva, founded by Ta'i-si-tu Byang-chub-rgyal-mtahan
(1302-1374)



(6) Rtse-chen, founded by Nya-dbon (Kun-dga'-dpal) (in 1366-1371).
(7) Rab-sgang Ka-bzhi-dgon, founded by Mkhan Byang-chub-dpal.
(8) Nyang-stod Lcang-rwa'i-chos-grwa, founded in 1413) by S1-tu Rab-brtan-
'phags (1389-1442).49
(9) Rong-byams-chen-syl-chos-grva, founded (in 1367?) by Drung Nor-bzang-pa
and his brother. 50
When Shakya-uchog-Idan was writing this account in 1495, some seven notable
seminaries were still at least nominal adherents of the Prania traditions of the
old school of Rngog and Phyva-pa, though the actual teaching lineages of the PVin
and Badus pe were then on the verge of dying out:
Legs-pa'i-shes-rab
in
(1) Gsang -phu Ne'u-thog] [founded by Rngog
1073752
(2) (Snye-thang] Bde [-ba-can]53
(3) [Tshal] Gung [-thang Chos-'khor-gling)54
(4) Khro-phus
(5) Snar-thang96
(6) Zha-1057
(7) Gnas-rnying 58
Any exposition of the PV in these seminaries must have originated from Sa-pa's
lineage.
As for the later lineages of study of the PV and Rigs gter, Shakya-uchog-
Idan mentions that there was a special lineage at Sa-skya that was passed by Bia-
ma-dan-pa Bsod-name-rgyal-mtshan (1312-1375) to Theg-chen-chos-kyi-rgyal-po Kun-
dga'-bkra-shis (1349-1425).” But the main branch of the tradition that was
perpetuated in many seminaries great and small resulted from the activities of
G.yag-ston Sangs-rgyas-dpal (1348-1414). This great scholiast was not only a key
transmitter of Prajña paranità exegesis, but he is also said to have been a note-
worthy reviver of Pramāņa studies within the Sa-skya-pa tradition. His two main
followers in terms of their later influence were Ngor-chen Kun-dgal-buang-po
(1382-1456) and Rong-ston Shes-bya-kun-rig (1367–1449). The first is not best
known as a great teacher of Pramāņa, but he taught the Rige, ater and used his
influence to spread the exegetical tradition of G.yag-ston. He founded Ngor
monastery in 1429 and established there a schoolhouse (grwn khang) for the teach-
ing of the Rige ster and G.yag-ston's commentary on the Pv. Ngor-chen also
directly founded three branch monasteries where this lineage was maintained:



(1) Glo-bo Thub-bstan-rnam-rgyalº2
(2) Pu-rang Chos-sde-dga'-byed-tshal
(3) Chu-"dus-chos-sde Chos-'khor-nor-bu-gling
And under his instructions two more branch monasteries were established:
(4) Gu-ge Brgya-gling-thang
(5) Rting-khebs-kyi-chos-'khor Dga'-dan-rtse-mo
Rong-ston Shes-bya-kun-rig, the second great follower of G.yag-ston, had an
even greater influence on the tradition, for he was a master of general scholastic
studies, unlike Ngor-chen who specialized in Tantra. Rong-ston founded his great
seat of 'Phan-po Nalendra in 1435. The following establishments were subsequently
founded as its branches: 63
(1) Rgyal-byed-tshal-gyi-chos-grua in Shar-rgyal-mo-rong. founded by Gzhu-
ston Bsod-nams-rin-chen under the patronage of Batan-la rgyal-bu.
(2) Dge-'phel-gyi-chos-grwa in Rab-sgang, founded by Lha-'bri Shes-rab-rdo-
rje
(3) Ra-mdo-chos-'khor-gling-gi-chos-grwa at Spom-'bor, founded by Dbus-ston
Rin-chen-blo-gros.
(4) Cho-shul Byang-chub-gling, founded by Mkhan-chen Padma-bzang-po.
(5) Gtsang Sga-gdong, founded by Chos-lung-ka-bcu-pa.
(The previous two were founded as residences for Rong-ston.)
(6) 'Bras-yul seminary, "founded in the fire-female-hare year" (1447), "the
twenty-fifth (sic) year after Nalendra's founding" (1.e. 14592].0
(7) Pan-khyung-tshang, founded in 1452 by Don-yod-dpal.
(8) Rta-nag Gser-gling, "founded in the fire-dog year (siel (1466) by Go-bo
rab-'byans-pa." (These last three were founded through the patronage of
the ruler Nor-bu-bzang-po and son, and they had been expanded between the
times of their initial foundation and "the present" (1.e. the time that
Shakya-mchog-Idan wrote his account in 1495).)
In addition to Shakya-mchog-Idan's account, one could mention that the following
seminaries were established as branches of 'Bras-yul Skyed-tshal or Rta-nag Thub-
bstan by students of Byams-chen rab-'byams-pa or Go-rams-pa or both:
Thugs-rje-
(1) "Jad Thub-bstan-yanga-pa-can, founded by Mus rab-byams-pa
dpal-bzang in 1490.



(2) Goyan-yod Bya-rgod-gshongs, founded by Pan-chen 'Bum-phrag-gsun-pa Byams-
pa-chos-don-'grub [?] in 1489.
(3) Chos-'khor-lhun-po, founded by Gzhung-brgya-pa Dngos-grub-dpal-'bar
(4) Bzhad-ri Skyed-tshal-'og-ma, founded by Mnga'-ris-pa Lha-dbang-blo-gros.
These are listed by the Rta-nag mkhan-po Chos-rnan-rgyal in his history of Bud-
dhism (Bstan pa dang batan "dzin). He also lists the following as belonging to or
having been converted to the scholastic tradition of Go-rams-pa:
(5) Ra-ba-smad, converted to Go-rams-pa's tradition by Stag-phrug Kun-dga'-
dpal-'byor.
(6) Rdo-phud-chos-'khor-gnas, and
(7) Dags-po-grva-tshang, converted to his systes by Shes-grong pan-chen Blo-
gros-chos-kyl-rgyal-po.
(8) Rnan-rgyal-gser-khang grva-tshang [of Gsang-phu), also known as Ga-zi
grwa-tshang, founded by Ga-zi bka'-bcu-pa Shakya-blo-gros
There were also many more branch monasteries of Ngor and Nalendra that were
founded in Khams and A-tado in the 15th century, such as the Nalendra branches
Nang-chen Pe-ru-chung-dgon Brtse-chen-chos-rdzong-gling. Nang-chen Gtsang-unda'-
dgon, Sde-gzhung dgon-pa, Tre'u Gdong-thog-dgon, Mi-nyag Ri-khug-dgon, and A-ndo
Di-phu-chos-rje-dgon-pa. In later times the Ngor-lugs became more and more in-
fluential, and many Nalendra branches were subsequently converted to Ngor-pa
establishments.
Though the PV vas the main Pramāņa work that Sa-paņ transmitted to later
generations, it was not the only one. The biography of Rong-ston, for instance,
records that G.yag-ston Sangs-rgyas-dpal taught Rong-ston the following Pranapa
works according to the exegetical traditions that had come down through Sa-pan:
(1) Dignaga's PS with commentary and subcommentary
(2) PV with subcommentary (1.e, with a commentary on the Värttika itself)
(3) Hetubindu
(4) Vådanyāya
The Riga gter, however, apparently did not gain a wide and unanimous fol-
loving within the main seminaries of dialectics in the late-13th to mid-14th
centuries. It did not supplant the Summaries (in their no doubt continually
revised forms) as the basic introduction to dialectical theory and practice. As
sole later (15th-century?) scholars from other traditions alleged, the teachings



13.8
of the Summaries were very detailed and were proven to be correct by careful
investigation, whereas in comparison the Rigs gter was "extremely rough," and
because of that one could not follow and maintain it literally. For this reason,
according to those opposing scholars, there did not appear authoritative lineages
of students for the Rigs gter. Shakya-mchog-ldan replied to the above charges
by listing some of the great scholars who maintained the study and teaching of the
Rige ster according to the correct tradition (the list will be presented later in
this chapter). However, both that criticism and Shakya-mchog-ldan's reply indi-
cate that there were not in fact many scholars in those days who had really
mastered the Rigs gter and who followed it carefully.
Thus when G.yag-aton in the late-14th or early-15th century wrote his
subcommentary on the Rigs gter the first of its kind) and began to teach it
widely, he seems to have been trying to revive the study of the the work.
Through his efforts the Rigs gter came to be appreciated again as a great master-
piece calling for careful, serious study. Perhaps the avalanche of commentaries
that broke loose in the 15th century should be attributed ultimately to the
efforts of this man. In Sa-skya-pa scholasticism from the late-14th century
onwards, moreover, the Rigs rter came to be one of the only two non-Indian works
to be included among the eighteen core texts known as the "Eighteen of Great
Renown" (grags chen bco brgyad)--the other Tibetan work in the group being Sa-
pan's Sdom gsum rab dbye.
Sa-skya-pa Teaching Lineages of Pramapa
Sa-pan established a thriving school of PV studies. The early commentators
on the PV in this school as listed by Glo-bo mkhan-chen in his Rise Rter nyer akho
include the following three authors of comments on the meaning (don 'grel):'
(1) "U-yug-pa Rigs-pa'i-seng-ge, author of the R eps grub pa
(2) Rong-ston (1.e. Ldong-ston?) chen-po, author of the Rigs pall snang ba
(3) Kun-mkhyen Lho-pa, author of the Sde bdun gsal ba
He also lists the following six early scholars who wrote word-by-word commentaries
(tshis grel), two of whom (nos. 1 and 4) are otherwise unknown to me:
(1) Rwa-grags Stag-rdor
(2) Phyogs-glang gsar-ma (fl. c. 1320 at Sa-skya)
(3) Dpal-1dan-seng-ge



139
(4) Jo-btsun Grags-rgyal
(5) Mkhas-mchog Nor-bzang-dpal
(6) Gnas-drug-pa (a disciple of Bla-na-dam-pa Bsod-name-rgyal-mtshan)
The main lineages through which the PV was transmitted from Sa-pap to later
generations can be traced with some precision. Go-rams-pa Bsod-name-seng-ge in a
supplicatory prayer to the lineage (Tshad ma'i brgyud deba, pp. 276-29a) evokes
the following transmission:
The four Indian panditas
Sa-paņ (1182-1251)
*U-yog-pa (d. 1253)
Mdo-sde-dpal (fl. c. 1250-1280)
Jandbyangs-skya-bo (f1. c. 1280-1310)
[Dpang 10] Blo-gros-brtan-pa (1276-1342)
[Bla-ma-dam-pa) Beod-nams-rgyal-mtshan (1312-1375)
[Mkhan-chen) Brtson-'grus-dpal (fl. late-14th c.)
[G.yag-ston] Sangs-rgyas-dpal (1348-1414)
[Rong-ston] Shes-bya-kun-rig (1367-1449)
"Grags-pa'i-mt shan" (Mkhyen-rab-dbang-phyug-grags-bzang)
(Byams-chen rab-' byams-pa] Sangs-rgyas-'phel
A similar lineage is recorded in the lineage-prayer of Shakya-chog-Idan (Tshad ma
rnam grel nges kyi brgyud pa'i gol 'debs, pp. 79.). It is noteworthy for the
presence of the great scholar Nor-bzang-zhabs in the place of three generations of
scholars: 'Jam-dbyangs-skya-bo, Dpang-lo Blo-gros-brtan-pa, and Bla-ma-dam-pa
Bsod-nans-rgyal-mtshan:
Śäkyasri
Pan-chen Sa-skya-pa
'U-yug-pa
Mdo-sde-dpal
Nor-bzang-zhabs
Brtson-'grus-dpal
Mi-pham-chos-kyi-rje [G.yag-ston]
Rong-po'i-zhabs [Rong-ston]
Don-yod-dpal
[Shakya-) mchog-ldan-legs-pa'i-blo



140
Another PV lineage received and transmitted by Shakya-uchog-1dan is recorded in
the gaan yig of Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen (Dpal ldan, vol. 1, p. 105.1 [ka
53a.1]):
The Four Indian Panditas
Sa-skya Pandita
'U-yus-pa Rigs-pa'1-seng-ge
'Jam-skya Nam-mkha'-dpal
Dpang lo-tsā-ba Blo-gros-brtan-pa
Dpal idan-bla-ma-dam-pa Bsod-name-rgyal-mtshan
Mchas-pa Brtson-'grus-dpal
G.yag Mi-pham Chos-kyi-bla-ma
Rong ston
Mkhas-pa Yon-tan-dpal
Pan-chen Shākya-mchog-ldan
Sa-skya'i-las-chen Ye-shes-lhun-grub
Rje-btsun Kun-dga'-grol-mchog
The same source (p. 104.2 [525.2]) records the following lineage of Shakya-mchog-
ldan for the lung of the Pramapasamuccaya only. It is notable for the appearance
of Nor-bzang-dpal and his teacher Sde-dun-pa Dpal-1dan-seng-re.
Kha-che Pan-chen Sākyasri
Sa-skya Pandita
'U-yug-pa Rig(s)-pa'i-seng-ge
Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal
Sde-hdun-pa Dpal-ldan-seng-ge
Mkhas-pa Nor-bzang-dpal
Mkhan-chen Brtson-'grus-dpal
G.yag Mi-pham Chos-kyi-bla-ma
Rong-ston Shes-bya-kun-rig
Mkhas-pa Don-yod-dpal
Pan-chen Shakyamchog-ldan
Sa-skya'i-las-chen Ye-shes-lhun-grub
Rje-btsun Kun-dga'-grol-mchog
The following rather standard list is given by Ngag-dang-chos-grags (Bodky
mkhas D, p. 205.6):



Kha-che Pan-chen [Śākyadri]
Sa-pan
"U-y48-pa Rigs-pa'1-seng-ge
Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal
Jandbyanga-skya-bo
Dpang lo-tsa-ba
Bla-ma-dam-pa (Bsod-nams-rgyal-mtshan]
Nya-dbon Kun-dga'-dpal
Goyag-ston
Ngag-dang-chos-grags states here that some of these teachers were from the same
generation, while others represent successive generations. He is referring for
instance to 'U-yug-pa and Zhang, both of whom are recorded to have been disciples
of Sa-pan.'" Zhang was apparently much younger than 'U-yug-pa.
The Brtson-'grus-dpal mentioned in several lineages was a great scholar o
Sa-skya who was a contemporary of Nya-dbon Kun-dga'-dpal, and indeed Ngag-dbang-
chos-grags here lists the latter instead. Sometimes Nya-dbon and Brtson-'grus-dpal
are listed as a pair in historical accounts, as for instance by 'Jam-dbyanga
Mkhyen-brtse'i-dbang-po (Gange can bod, P. 101 (da 5la]: nya dbon kun dga' dpal
dang/mkhan chen brtson grus dpal
chen brtson grus dpal te mkhas pa nya brtson ram enyis). Perhaps
Brtson-'grus-dpal was the senior of the two because, as will be seen below in a
Rigs gter lineage, the teacher Dkon-mchog-grags appears between Brtson-'grus-dpal
and G.yag-ston. According to the following source, however, in the PV lineage
both Kun-dga'-dpal and Brtson-'grus-dpal were direct teachers of G.yag-ston.
The Fifth Dalai Lama gives the main PV lineage as follows:
Sākyasri
Sugatasi
Danasila
Samghasri
Sa-pan
'U-yug-pa Rig(s)-pa'i-seng-ge
Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal
Jam-skya Nam-mkha'-dpal
Dpang lo-tsa-ba Blo-gros-brtan-pa
Bla-na-dan-pa Bsod-nams-rgyal-mtshan
Nya-dbon Kun-dga'-dpal
Mkhas-pa Brtson-'grus-dpal
Red-mda-ba
Tsong-cha-pa
-G.yag-pa
Rong-ston



Royal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen
Mkhyen-rab-dbang-phyug Grags-pa-bzang-po
(=Dwar-khans-pa Grags-bzang)
A more complete lineage as reconstructed from Ngag-dbang-chos-grags looks like
this.76
Kha-che Pan-chen
Sa-pao
Lho-pa kun-skhyen
'U-yug-pa
Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal
Jam-dbyangs-skya-bo
Dpang lo-tsi-ba
Bla-sa-dan-pa
Nyg-dbon Kun-dga'-dpal
l o-chen Byang-chub-rtse-do
Red-mda'-ba
Tsong-kha-pa
Rgyál-tshab
Mkha's-grub
G.yag-ston
Rong-ston
Lo-chen Grags-pa
Bo-dong Pan-chen Phyoga-las-rnam-rgyal
Mkhyen-rab-dbang-phyug
grags-bzang
Don-yod-dpal
Byams-chen rab-'byams-pa
Sangg-rgyas-'phel
Gser-ndog pán-chen
Shakya-mchog-Idan
Jam-dbyangs-kun-
dga'-chos-bzang
Pan-chen
*Bum-phrag-
gsun-pa
Go-rams-pa
Bsod-nams-
Leags-thang
rab-'byams-pa
seng-ge
Gzhung-brgya-pa
Kong-ston
Mus rab-byams-pa
The complete PV lineage of Tsong-kha-pa is unfortunately not available from
that master's own son vis. The lineage of course originates with the Sa-akya-pa,



143
but in the reprint editions I have consulted (including the old Lha-se Zhol
xylographs) the lineage suddenly breaks off after the following:
77
Sākyasribhadra
Sa-pan
Rigs-seng
The Xsan yis of Mkhas-grub-rje is available, but it gives a lineage not attested
elsewhere: 78
Kha-che Pan-chen
Chos-rje Sa-pan
'U-yug-pa Rigs-pa'1-seng-ge
Lte-ra-ba Chos-grags
Byang-chub-dpal
Mkhan-po Dbang-phyug-dpal
Nya-abon Kun-dga'-dpal
Rje-btsun Red-mda'-ba
Rin-po-che Dpal-'byor-shes-rab
[Tsong-kha-pa) Blo-bzang-grags-pa
Mkhas-grub
Other sources record lineages that branched off from the main lineages but
which did not continue much beyond the 14th or 15th centuries. Bu-ston, for
Instance, received the exposition (bshad pa) of the PV in this lineage:
Pan-chen Sakyasri
Chos-r je Sa-skya-pa
*U-yug-pa Bsod-seng
Khang-sten "Od-zer-rgyal-mtshan (=Khang-ston?)
Slob-dpon Tshad-ma-pa [Tshad-ma 'i-skyes-bu]
[Bu-ston]
The lung (reading transmission of the Pv, however, was received by Bu-ston in the
lineage of the old school of Rngog and Phywa-pa:
Rngog lo-tsā-ba
Khyung Rin-chen-grags



144
Roya-dmar Byang-chub-grags
Phywa-pa
Gtsang-nag-pa
Darma-bkra-shis
Gnyal-pa
Bo-dong-pa
Ldong-pa Grags-pa-dpal
Lho-pa Grub-seng
Tshad-ma'i-skyes-bu
[Bu-ston]
Another branch of the PV lineage from Sa-pan is recorded by 'Gos lo-tsi-
be. 8
Kha-che Pan-chen Sākyasri
Sa-pan
"U-yug-pa
Zhang-btsun Mdo-sde-dpal
"Jan-dbyangs-skya-bo
Dpai-ldan-pa
Jam-dbyangs Ston-gzhon
Nor-bzangs-dpal
Grags-rin-pa
'Jan-sngon-pa
Chos-seng-ba
Rngo-thog-pa
Chos-kyi-bzang-po
Rgyal-lha-khang-pa Bsam-
grub-ye-shes
Slob-dpon Bsam-grub-bzang-po
Mkhan-chen Rin-po-che
Rgyal-mtahan-bzang-po
"Gos 10-tsa-ba reports that this lineage (which is noteworthy for the absence of
both Nya-dbon Kun-dga'-dpal and Mkhan-chen Brtson-'grus-dpal) was not to be had
with others, and that Mkhan-chen Rgyal-mtshan-bzang-po found it through zealous
searching 82



The lineages recorded in Kong-sprul's compendium the Shes bya kun khyab
seem to be somewhat confused regarding the earliest period. They apparently give
more details for the early generations, but later they converge with the standard
lineages listed above. Another difference is that Kong-sprul adds this lineage
for the Dge-lugs-pa: 84
Sa-pan
Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal
Mkhas-pa-nor-bzang
Nya-dbon Kun-dga'-dpal
Red-mda'-ba
Tsong-kha-pa
In addition, Kong-sprul does not single out Zhang Mdo-ade-dpal as a central trans-
mitter of the main Sa-skya-pa lineage, but instead mentions him as one of four
main disciples of Nyi-thog-pa. He also seems to portray Jam-dbyange-skya-bo as
the direct disciple of 'U-yug-pa as well as of Nyi-thog-pa's disciples.
Riga gter Lineages
The above Sa-skya-pa lineages for the study of the PV should be taken as
also indicating the main lineages through which the exposition of the Rigs gter
passed, at least down to G.yag-ston and Rong-ston. This is corroborated by the
gaan yig of the Fifth Dalai Lama, where the following lineages are listed for the
lung of the Rigs gter:
Sa-pan
*U-yug-pa Rig[s]-pa'1-seng-ge
*U-yug-pa (sic) Mdo-sde-dpal
Bla ma 'Jam-dbyangs-rgyal-at shan [i.e. Jam-dbyangs-sky-bo?]
Dpang 10-tsa-ba Blo-gros-brtan-pa
Beod-nams-rgyal-mtshan
Mkhas-pa Betson-'grus-dpal
Dpal-ldan-tshul-khrims
Dkon-cog-grags
Shar-chen
Sa-bzang 'Phags-pa
Gzhon-nu-blo-gros
G.yag-pa Sangs-rgyas-dpal
Ngor-chen



Independent of the lung lineages, the only list of the main teachers of the Rigs
gter that I have come across is given by Shakya-mchog-ldan:
[Sa-pan)
'U-yug-pa
Te'u-ra-pa
Mdong-ston
Nor-bzang
Nya Brtson
Dkon-grags
G.yag
Rong
The first three names after Sa-pan-1.e. 'U-yug-pa, Telu-ra-pa and Mdong-ston--
according to some sources belong to students of Sa-pan who were renowned for their
mastery of Pramāņa. However, as seen in the lineage recorded by Mkhas-grub-rje,
one of 'U-yug-pa's students was a Lte-ra-ba Chos-grags. Nor-bzang, the fifth
name, belongs to a subsequent generation. According to one lineage of Shakya
mchog-ldan and also one of Kong-sprul's lists, he was a student of Zhang Mdo-sde-
dpal, though in other lists he is given as a disciple of Sde-bdun-pa Dpal-ldan-
seng-ge. According to Shakya-nchog-Idan, he was a teacher of Brtson- grus-dpal,
whereas Kong-sprul lists him as a teacher of Nya-dbon. Ngag-dbang-chos-grags
also mentions him as an important scholar in the tradition, calling him Sa-skya
Nor-bzang but not specifying his exact position in the 11neage. Nya probably
stands for Nya-dbon [Kun-dga'-dpal]. Brtson is short for Brtson-'grus-dpal, who
as mentioned above was an important contemporary of Nya-dbon Kun-dgal-dpal. The
seventh name, Dkon-grags, belongs to a disciple of Nya-dbon who was a teacher of
G.yag-ston. The final two names--G.yag and Rong--are the famed G.yag-ston
Sangs-rgyas-dpal and Rong-ston Shes-bya-kun-rig.
A11 the above were scholars who, according to Shakya-mchog-Idan, did their
best to transmit the teachings of the Rigs gter complete and intact. Yet there
were also some comentators on the Rigs gter who, while claiming to uphold this
tradition, nevertheless made the Rigs gter the target for some of their refuta-
tions. These cannot be counted as true transmitters of the lineare. Indeed.
Shakya-mchog-ldan complained bitterly that in his time (the late-15th century) the
terminology used by Tibetan dialecticians had entirely gone over to other systems,
and that there were few scholars who could separate clearly and in detail Sa-pap's
own views in the Rigs gter from those of the opponents, who were mainly represen-
tatives of the bsdus pa traditions.93



147
NOTES
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma rigs...rnam bahad, p. 588.3 (regarding Sa-
paņ's treatment of mtshan nyid, mtshon bya, and mtshan aghi): de Itar bahad a 'di
yang/ bod kyi bedus pa dang mthun par mdzad pa yin la/.
-Shakya-mchog-ldan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 29.2.
"Bu-ston, Bde bar rahege, pp. 1049-50, as cited by L. van der Kuijp (1983),
p. 272, note 96. See also S. Nishioka (1983), p. 118. Shakya-mchog-ldan quotes
this list in Rngog lo, p. 447, as also noted by van der Kuijp. In addition,
Shakya-mchog-Idan refers to this source (though not by name) in his Tshad ma'i
mdo, p. 29. See also below, chapter 7, note 15.
"Two or three commentaries by Rngog Blo-ldan-shes-rab survive, all of which
seem to be "don bsdus pas," though none is accessible to me at present. See note
8 below.
For examples of this genre by others, see for instance the bsdus don found
in the collected works of Sa-pan:
(A) Smra sgo'i sa bead (TB no. 8) In the colophon of the work, it is re-
ferred to as the Smra sgo'i gnad kyi gnas badus don. See p. 117.1.4.
(B) Dri ma med pa'i badus don (TB no. 65B), pp. 393.1.6-4.6.
(C) Zung jug sal bali sa bcad (TB no. 66)
(D) Bahes pa'i spring yig gi bedus don (TB no. 114)
(The last is a late and probably spurious accretion to Sa-pan's works. C. L.
Kawamura (1975), pp. 96-113, where it is treated as genuine, and Chr. Lindtner
(1982), p. 219, note 184.) On the badus don, see also KhJ II 4 (p. 95.1.6, tha
1918.6), where Sa-pan discusses two aspects of the bsdus don as applied to
teaching: (1) a brief summary of the general contents of a work, and (2) a topical
outline.
A more detailed idea of the Pramana texts studied in the Rngog and Phyva-
pa tradition down to the early-14th century can be got from Bu-ston, Blam dam
pa, p. 38. There it is recorded that Bu-ston himself studied the following works
in this tradition:
(1) PV (lung only)
(2) PVin
(3) Nyāyabindu



148
(4) Hetubindu
(5) Sambandhapariksa with commentary
(6) Saptanāntarasiddhi
(7) Vadanyaya (this and the above six forming the "Tshad masde bdun" of
Dharmakirti)
(8) Dignāga's Pranapasamuccaya
(9) Dharmottara's PVin commentary
(10) Dharmottara's Nyāyabindu commentary
(11) Kamalasila's Pūrvapakşasapkşipti on the Nyāyabindu
Such outlines were probably first composed for the purpose of simplifying
the work of Tibetan teachers and students by clarifying the often complicated
relations of the many levels of topics and sub-topics in the great Indian
treatises. One of the Indian panditas who visited Tibet is said to have noticed
the utility of such outlines and commended their use. (Ven. Dezhung Rinpoche,
personal communication.)
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 29.2: bdox ayld chen po di nas
batan 'chos rayas par mdzad pa'i dbu tshugs. See also ibid. p. 12.7: bod vul du
rtor se'i srol 'byed kyi rtsom pa byung ba't thog ma.
"Ibid., p. 29. His commentary on the Ratnagotravibhāra (RGV) was probably
available then, for it is extant even now. See D. Seyfort Ruegs (1969), p. 24,
where its title is given as Theg chen rgyud bla't don badus pa and it is described
as a 66-folio Lhasa [Zhol] xylograph. L. van der Kuijp (1985), pp. 49€, has
reported the existence of his commentary on the Abhisamayālapkāra, which survives
as a ninety-nine folio Bkra-shis-'khyil xylograph. In addition, Mr. van der Kuijp
has kindly informed me that he has located a very brief badus don of the Mahayana-
sütrālapkāra attributed to Rngog: Mdo ade rayan syi bsdus don, Don-grub-rgyal-
mtshan, ed.. Legs par bahad pa bka' dams rin po che'i gsung di sces btus nor bull
bang ndzod (Delhi: 1985), pp. 153f.
Shakya-uchog-Idan, Tshad ba'i ndo, p. 12.6. Here Shakya-mchog-Idan also
quotes from the first lines of the "tik chen." Cf. L. van der Kuijp (1983), p.
34.
For example, his Spring yig bdud rtsit this pa was available since
Shakya-uchog-Idan wrote a commentary on it. See his Spring yis bdud rtsi'i this
polirnam bahad dpag bsam yongs 'du'i lfon phreng, Collected Works, vol. 24, pp.



149
320.6–348.6. See also above, note 8.
The only source recording the existence of this work is A-khu-chin Shes-
rab-raya-taho's Dpe rayun dkon pa 'sal zhig gi the yig (MHTI no. 11810). There
it is listed as tshad ma'i badus pa kha shas.
References to Rgya-dmar-ba's interpretations on Madhyamaka and the tathāga-
tagarbha are noted by L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 293, note 212.
Shakya-mchog-ldan, Rngog lo, p. 451.3: tshad bsdus dang/ dbu bsdus kyi
srol thog mar phye.
Ibid.: szhung lugs bzhi bcu tsam gyi rnam bahad mdzad. Some of his
commentaries are listed by A-khu-chin Shes-rab-rgya-atsho. See for instance MHTL
nos. 1131711320, as listed by L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 299, note 259.
**Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 32.7: badus pa rayas "bring badus
Raum mdzad par grags pa'i nang nas 'bring po tshad ma vid kyi mun sel. Shakya-
nchog-Idan thus specifies that the medium-length version was the Tshad ma vid kya
mun sel. The extensive rgyas pa version would seem to have been the autocommen-
tary 11sted as MHTL no. 11804. I have not seen any other mention of the brief
(bsdus) summary.
See above, note 12. Actually two Madhyamaka summaries, one greater and
one smaller, are attributed to him and listed as MHTL no. 11321: dbu ma' badus pa
che chung anvis. See also Kong-sprul, Theg pa'i sgo, p. 560.4: phywe pa choa kyl
seng ges abu sore la badus pa che chung enyis remdzad/. Cf. the interpreta-
tion of the word bsdus pa as summaries of the whole import of the Buddha's Word
and the treatises that explain that Word, quoted by Kong-sprul (ibid., p. 560.5):
rgyal ba'i bka' dang de 'grel batan bcos kyi//
dgongs don ma lus legs par bsdus pas na//
bsdus pe zhes su mkhas pas mtshan du btags/
These lines were also quoted by L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 62, and p. 294, note
223.
10Klong-rdol bla-na, Collected Works (New Delhi), vol. 1, p. 663.2: bod yul
8sang phu la soga pa' chos pra chen pos/ slob dpon cha a chos seng soge kyi
mdo sde pa'i rigls) pa'i 'sro sa [read 'gros) dang sbyar nas/ badus gra zhes pa't
srol gtod pa ni
kha dog dkar dmar rdzas chos ldog chos gnyia



gal dang mi 'gal spyi dang bye brag gnyis//
'brel dans ma brel tha dad tha min gnyis//
Ifes su 'gro 1dog rayu dang 'bras bu-gnyis/
snga bcan bar bcan phyi bcan mtshan mtshon goyis//
yod rtogs med rtogs dngos rtogs nyis//
zhes badus tahan bco brgyad du byed pa dang/ par chen chos lha od zer nas
brtsis pa'i stag tshang ra ba stod pa'i bla ma bcu bzhi. pa "phan yul gser khang
pa damchos rnam rgval gyis btsan po ngag dbang 'phrin lae lhun grub la brtsi
bzhag anang ba da Ita btsan po bsdus rar graga pa soge la bedus tahan nyer gcig tu
byed pa ni/ ...
I am not sure how the number of eighteen is arrived at regarding the topics
enumerated in the above verses. On this passage, cf. L. van der Kuijp (1983), p.
294, note 220.
On the badus arwa tradition of Phywa-pa, see also Dung-dkar Blo-bzang-
phrin-las, p. 379, note 350, and Rta-mgrin-rgyal, Bod du tahad mali, P. 69. For
another recent history of Tibetan Pramāṇa, see Tshul-khrims-bskal-bzang, Tabad
ma'i lo rayus.
"Shakya-mchog-ldan, Rngog lo, p451.4: khyad par mshon sbyorgyi rnam
szhag Ervas Pa de nas byung/. Here mtahon sbyor should perhaps be understood as
mtshan mtshon gzhi gsum gyi sbyor ba. Shakya-mchos-ldan uses the former termino-
logy in his Tshad me rige...dgonge, vol. 10, p. 270.5. L. van der Kuijp (1983),
pp. 65-68, discusses Phywa-pa's role in this area and also cites the justementioned
passage.
The attribution of this method of exposition to Phyva-pa was first made
by Th. Stcherbatsky (1930-32), vol. 1, p. 58. See also E. Obermiller (1934), p.
222. L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 62, asserts that this method was adopted by Sa-
skya-pascholiasts only in the 14th century. This style of exposition was also
known as thal "phreng ("a string of consequences"). Go-rams-pa, Sde bdun, P. 665
(kha 14la), criticizes some aspects of his contemporaries' use of thal and phyir.
Badus ra textbooks too are a type of obligatory manual (yis cha).
20MHTL no. 11811.
-Dan-'bag-pa criticized Phywa-pa extensively on certain points (e.8. re-
garding due rdul phran thug med), but this does not seem to have made a favorable
impression on 'Gos lo-tsa-ba. See the latter's Deb ther, p. 298.12 (G. Roerich



151
tr. (1976), p. 334). Cf, KTRG, P. 171.4.2; L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 70.
Shakya-mchog-Idan evidently had access to Dan-'bag-pa's work, and he refers
to it quite a few times. See L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 96.
22On Rma-bya-ba, see D. Seyfort Ruegs (1983), p. 230, note 68, and P.
Williams (1985). For some additional references to the Rma-bya-ba(s), see below,
KhJ III translation, note 158.
23 See MHTL no. 11330.
24MHTL nos. 11324, 11325.
25 Shakya-achog-ldan, Rngog lo, p. 453.2.
2 Shakya-uchog-ldan, Chos kyl 'khor, p. 469.3: 'u yug pas rnam bahad rigs
ndzod dang/ badus pa rire sgrub mdzad/rnam grel luge kyl rhan bahad gys thog
mayin par grags/ Shākya-mchog-ldan seems to indicate that this Summary too
belonged to the tradition of the PV (rnan 'grel lugs), which would place it within
the Pramāņa tradition of Sa-pan.
Roerich (1976), pp. 790-792, and J.
'On Rnam-rgyal-rdo-rje, see also G.
Naudou (1980), p. 256.
"That Summaries (bsdus pe continued to be studied in the great 14th-
century seminaries is indicated by Shakya-mchog-Idan, Chos kyi 'khor, P. 469.6,
where he speaks of the "tradition of the Summary" (badus pa'i srol) as having been
followed in many seminaries in accordance with the Riga gter. This is probably a
reference to a bedue grys or bsdus rwa class. It is also recorded that Bu-ston
mastered a Pranāņa Summary as a student. See D. Seyfort Ruegs (1966), P. 71, note
4. Elsewhere Shakya-mchog-Idan refers to such classes as the badus ra, and to
the terminology employed in them as badus skad. See his Rang luga, kyl drag gzhi
ma't rnam gzhag, p. 167.3:
col med col chung khyed cag si//
badus ra'i bsdus skad de 'dra na//
lung ra'i lung chos ci 'byung shes//
rige ra'i rigs palang de Itar go//
Shakya-nchog-Idan, Mkhas pa, p. 99.4, also mentions later Tibetan followers of the
badus pe tradition who were critical of the Rigs gter: tshad ma'i phyoga ni tshad
badus rnams las 'byung ba dag ches zhib cing dpyad pas rham par dag la/ rigs pa'i



gter ni ches shin tu rtsing pas sgra 11 bzhin par skyong ai nus pas slob gyud
tshad ldan dar kyang ma byung ngo zer mos
L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 294, mote 220, believes that the attribution of
the badus. grua textbooks to Phywa-pa as suggested by A. Vostrikov (1935-37), pp.
60€, and supported by G. Tucci (1949), p. 137, cannot be substantiated. On the
contrary, it is very likely that the bsdus grwa began as a class in which the
badus pe textbooks were studied, and that these textbooks had a continuous deve-
lopment down to the present. See also above, note 16.
Klong-rdol bla-ta, Collected Works (Mussoorie, 1963), part pha, p. 263,
classified the Rigs gter as one of Sa-pan's "three treasures" (gter geum), though
as mentioned above this classification was not known in the Sa-sky-pa tradition.
It was usually classed by Sa-skya-pas with the Sdom sun rab dbye and Thub pa'i
dgonge sal (and sometimes the Legs bshad) as one of three essential treatises of
their order.
Sa-pay described this treatise as a destroyer of bad dialectics, the
eliminator of the bad tradition of previous Tibetan teachers. RT, P. 167.1.2:
rtog ge ngan joms bstan bcos chen po 'di byas so//. See also ibid., p. 167.1.3:
rgan po'i luge ngan dor nas ngas 'di bshad/7. And in the RTRG, P. 167.4.2: yang
dag pall shes po la rigs par smra bar khas 'che barnams kyang log par. tog pudu
ma mthong bas de sundbyung ba dang yang dan pa'i don gtan la dbab pa'i. phyir 11
brtsam mo//.
Shakya-nchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 39.4: mdo sema kyl zhung thad sor
bzhas nas badus pa't srol thog bar phye ba ni tshad ma rige pa'i gter ..
note 16, where some of the categories said to have been
treated by Phywa-pa are listed. See also Shakya-machog-idan, Mkhas pa, p. 96,
where the following subjects are enumerated: azhan sel dang/ sal 'brel dang/
at shan ntshon gyl rham gzhag sogsgrel mdzad azhan lama ras par rang kho nali
roam dpyod kyis rtsal thon du mdzad pa yin/.
For more details on Phywa-pa's theories, see L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp.
71-84. This is the text and translation of Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tahad ma'. mdo, pp.
33-38.
There is also said to have been a thirteen-chapter division of the Rigs
gter maintained by Sa-pap's student Ldong-ston. See Glo-bo mkhan-chen, Sde bdun
mdo...rnan bshad, p. 14.5 (76.5).



Sa-pap also quotes or refers to the views of Prajñākaragupta and other
commentators a few times. See e.g. RTRG, Pp. 199.4.6, 221.3.5, and 221.4.4. The
latter two passages have been discussed by L. van der Kutjp (1983), pp. 6.
**Sa-pap seems to have composed or at least envisaged a third work on
Pranāņa. This is indicated by a passage in his RTRG where he says that he dis-
cussed two of the jätis (Itag chod) elsewhere in detail (p. 259.3.3): rabbyed
dang mtshunge pa dang dus las "das pa mtshunga pa'1 dbye ba mang po zhig yod mod
kyi) i se mangs kyis dogs pas ma bris mod/ kho bosszhan du bahad par bita bar
bya'o//. Almost nothing else is known about the work referred to. Glo-bo mkhan-
chen refers to it in his Sde bdun adornam bshad, P. 392.6 (1965.6), where he
mentions that this work was said to exist in early annotations (mchan rnying but
that it was not available in his time and should therefore be searched for.
There are several other mysterious citations of unknown works in his writings.
>>KAJ III 4-10. See RT, pp. 165.4.5-166.1.1; 166.2.3-5.
Khu III 68. See RTRG, P. 264,1,1.
As mentioned above, Shakya-mchog-ldan, Choa kyi. 'khor, P. 467.1, grouped
the KhJ together with the Sdom gsum rab dbye and Phyoga bcu't as one of Sa-pap's
three major polemical works.
38Shakya-uchog-ldan, Chos kyi "khor, p. 470.2: ding sang rnan 'grel gyi
bohad rgyun sa skya pa las ma rgyud (sic) pa su yang sed do
"Shakya-nchog-Idan, Tshad na'i ndo, p. 39.3: rnan 'grel la ayur bcos dang
nyin re la tha talang cho thun re re gsung ba'i dan bca' mdzad. See also Glo-bo
mkhan-chen, KhJNSh, p. 35,4 (18a.4): chos mthun (read: thun) re nyin bzhin ma
chage par mdzad pa'i dam bca' mdzad pas/.
4 The Rigs sgrub is also mentioned by Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma
rise...dgongs, vol. 9, p. 277.7. *U-yug-pa in his PV commentary, Tshad ma rnam
Karel gvi grel pa, f. 398b.5 (vol. 2, p. 396.2). himself mention the work
(though here the spelling is rigs grub): di dag thams cad ni rigs pa grub par
gtan la phab zin pas ...
"Shakya-mchog-ldan, Chos kyi "khor, p. 469.3: khyad par sde snod dang room
grel ayi bahad rayun 'dzin pa la/ 'uyug pas rnan bahad rigs mdzod dang/ badus



pa rige sgrub mdzad/ tham srel lugs kyi rnam bahad kyi thog ma yin par eroga
te ra ba byams mgon dang/ idong ston shes rab dpal dang/ dkar shakya grage dang/
sharp shes rab 'byung gnas/ nags phug pa shes rab 'od zer dang/ lho pakun
mkhyen la sogs dngos kyi slob ma rnan 'grel mkhas par mkhyen pa das vin zhes grass
la
phyis ni raya nor bya gsum dang/ nya dar ma rin chen/ nya doon po kun dga
dpal khas pa'i dbang po &.yox azhon gnyis rnams tenyi zla Itar gragg pa bon
pa rnans ni stshon pa tsam mo.
'grel ayi roam bahad sa luge dang badus paris
"Ibid., p. 469.6: Tha
gter Itar "dzin pa't bahad grva.
4* See A. Ferrari (1958), pp. 67, 156.
1. Ferrari (1958), p. 153, note 536: "It was founded in 1225 by the Sa
skya pa teacher Tag rtse la rgyab pa Śākya sen ge and was restored in 1354 by
Ta'1 dben Blo gros rgyal mtshan (b. 1332): Re'u mig, pp. 59, 60."
She was perhaps a disciple of 'Jam-dbyanga-don-yod-rgyal-mtshan (1310-
1344). See Ngor-chen, Thob vis, p. 77.3.3.
40 See Bo-dong pan-chen Phyogs-las-rnan-rgyal, Goang 'dus lung rigs, PP.
468-470.
"74. Ferrari (1958), p. 142, n. 417: "founded by the first prince of rGyal
rtse, "Phags pa dpal bzang po (born 1318) [Tucci, Indo Tibetica) IV, 1, p. 14."
But in Tucci (1949), p. 664, the date of its founding is given as 1366-71. "Dzan-
thang bla-na, pp. 385.7-396.2, supplies the dates 1285-1379 for Nya-dbon Kun-dga'-
dpal. The death date seems reasonable, but both will need further verification
for the birth date makes his twenty-seven years older than his teacher Bla-ma-dan-
pa Bsod-nans-rgyal-mtshan.
**Shakya-mchog-ldan, Chos kyi 'khor, p. 452.6, identifies the founder as
'Jam-dbyangs Shakya-gahon-nu's disciple Ka-bzhi-rkang-cig (fl. mid-13th c.). This
was not Byang-chub-dpal-bzang-po the disciple of Kha-che Pan-chen who founded
Spos-khang in 1213. On the latter see A. Ferrari (1958), p. 142, note 422. A
Byang-chub-dpal who flourished from the late-13th to early-14th centuries appears
in Mkhas-grub-rje's PV lineage. See below, note 78 and chart.



"Tucci (1949), p. 665. The same ruler founded the Dpal-'khor-chos-sde of
Rgyal-rtse in c. 1418, and the Sku-'bum there in 1427. See A. Ferrari (1958), P.
141, note 413.
5° According to A. Ferrari (1958), p. 162, note 631, Sems-dpal-chen-po
Gzhon-nu-rgyal-mchog (1311-1390) was its spiritual founder in 1367.
Shakya-achog-ldan, Chos kyk 'khor, p. 470.3. See also 'Gos lo-tsa-ba, P.
299.1 (G. Roerich tr. [1976), p. 335). For a list of works studied in this
tradition in the early-14th century, see above, note 5.
On Gsang-phu Ne'u-thog, see A. Ferrari (1958), p. 165, note 672. In
addition, accounts of the monastery's abbatial succession are found for instance
in Tshal-pa Kun-dga'-rdo-rje, Debther dmar po, chapter 20 (Beijing, 1981, pp. 68-
73); Shakya-nchog-ldan, Rngog lo: 'Gos lo-tsā-ba, Deb ther, angon po: and Sde-srid
Sangs-rgyas-rgya-atsho, Vaidurya ser po. Mr. S. Onoda also informs me that an
independent manuscript Gsang phu't gdan rabs survives in the Otani University
1ibrary.
Shakya-echog-Idan, Rngor lo, p. 452.2, states that this was founded by
Mnyal-zhig's disciple Rgya-ston Phying-ru-ba. The year of its founding is said to
have been 1205. See A. Ferrari (1958), p. 165, note 668.
The seminary here was founded by 'Jam-dbyangs Shakya-gzhon-nu and the
Tshal-pa nobleman Dga'-bde. See Shakya-mchog-ldan, Rngor lo, p. 452.4, and A.
Ferrari (1958), p. 106.
The seminary for the study of Prajāpāramita and Pranaga at Khro-phu was
founded by Mnyal-pa Dad-pa-bzang-po's disciple Bzang-ring Dar-ma-tshul-khrins.
See Shakya-mchog-ldan, Rngog lo, p. 452.1.
According to Shakya-achog-Idan, ibid., p. 453.6, the teaching lineage of
Pranāņa at Snar-thang was founded by Phyva-pa's student Bru-sha Bsod-name-seng-se.
According to Shakya-mchog-Idan, ibid., the Pramāņa lineage at Zhwa-lu
came there from Khro-phu, and thus it goes back to Mnyal-zhig. This is confirmed
by Bu-ston's lineage, on which see his Bla ma, p. 38.6.
This temple seems to have been located in the upper Nyang valley.



156
Shakya-mchog-ldan, Chos kyl 'khor, p. 470.3: roan 'grel gyi rnam bahad
gdung brgyud zhal ngos mdzad pa ni rte bla wa dam pas rnan bshad rayas padang/
theg chen chos kyi bgyal pos bedus pa zhig ndzad/ roam srel ayi szhung skyur
len/ sngon nas da 1ta'1 bar du sa skya'i tshoge las mang ba 'byung ma nyong la/
nya tik m ad pa'i dus der tshig skang pa phyed re team las ma thob pa byung zhes
grag 20
Other teachers from the 'Khon family, such as some of the main masters of
the Gzhi-thog bla-brang, taught the Rigs gter at Sa-skya during the late-14th and
early-15th century.
boshakya-mchog-ldan, Dka! grel, p. 443.5:
de xt legs bahad nor bu ni//
phyoga 'dir skal ba dman pa la//
gangs can nor wtsho'1 gting zhig tu//
yun rings gab cing nub par. gyur/
de nas sangs rayas batan pa'i dpa//
ded dpon mkhas pa jigs med des/
rnan bahad dang ni [p. 444) phrin las kyi//
rgyal mtshan rtse mor bkod de'o//
61 Shakya-mchog-ldan, Chos kyi 'khor, p. 470.7.
This is Rnan-rgyal Thub-bstan-dar-rgyas-gling. On the conflicting tradi-
tions of its establishment, see D. Jackson (1984), p. 42, note 6.
63Shakya-mchog-Idan, Chos kyi 'khor, p. 471.2.
**Ibid., p. 471.4: na lendra btab nas lo nyi shu rtsa Inga pa ne moyos la
'bras yul du bshad pa'i grwa btsugs. According to A. Ferrari (1958), p. 163, note
635. Skyed-mo-tshal in Bras-yul was founded by Byama chen rab-'byams-pa Sangs-
rgyas-'phel in 1447. The Rin-spungs-pa ruler Nor-bu-bzang-po was said by Shakya-
mchog-ldan to be the patron of the founding of the seminary (bshad grea) there.
Ibid., p. 471.5: me mo khyi lo la ko bo rab 'byana pasta nag ser kling
du bahad krwa bt suge. The date 1478 is found in the Relu mig of Sum-painkhan-po
for the founding of Rta-nag Thub-bstan-rnan-rgyal by Go-bo rab-' byams-pa. See A.
Ferrari (1958), p. 158. L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 120€, gives the year 1472
for the founding of Rta-nag Thub-bstan-nam-rgyal.



Rta-nag mkhan-po Chos-rnam-rgyal (f1 17th c.), Batan pedang bstan "dzin,
ff. 90b-91b:
mdo sngags gnyis las [918] dang po'i srol 'byed kylsta bo. 8.yag rong anyis/
phyt. mas na lendra'am bod skad du rayun ayi dbang po zhes pa'i gtsug. Lax khana
btab/bshad rgyun rgya cher mdzad pas slob manor "dzin gyi rdul tsam byung mod/
de'l nang nas smra [=smar) khams pa grags pa bzang pos grwa tshang chen mo
btab/ de'i gdan sa nams sod chen mos bskyanga
byams chen rab 'byams pa sangs rayas 'phel gyis 'bras yul akyed mos tshal
btab/
de'i gdan sa p am dbyangs chos rte kun dga' chos bzang gia bakyang/
Tong ston don yod dpal gifs) se mo lung gi chos sde btab de'i gdan sa pag.
chen shākya mchog Idan gyis mdzad nas dgon pa thub batan gser mdog can du bsayur /
rong ston dang byams chen rab 'byams pa gayis char syi slob ma go rams bstan
pa't nyi as thog mar. skyed tshal Ryi zur 'chad mdzad/ phyis thub bstan rnam par
rgyal ba'i dgon pa btab/
del slob ma, mus rab 'byams pa thuga sie dpal bzang gia thub batan yang pa
can syis [sic] dgon pa btab/
'bum rams pa byams pa chos don 'grub kyi[s] bya rgod eshong btab/
8zhung brgya pa don (sic) grub dpal "bar ayis chos 'khor. Lhun po btab/
mnga' rie pa lha dbang blo gros kyis azhari bakyid [sic] tshal btab
stag [915] phrug kun dga' dpal 'byor gyis ra ba smad go rame chen po' bka!
gros su begyur
shes grong panchen ble gros chos kyi rgyal pos de phud chog 'khoranas
dang/ daga po grva tshang de'i bkal srol du begyur
gazi bka bcu pa shakya blo gros kyis rnam rgyal gser khang gi grwa tshang
gtsugs te ga zi grwa tshang du grage so
Cf. L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 121.
Shākya-mchog-ldan, Rje btsun thams, p. 309.4.
"As quoted above, note 42, Shakya-mchog-ldan mentions that many of the
major seminaries maintained the study or class of the "Summaries" in accordance
with the Rigs gter.
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Mkhas pa, p. 99.3: gzhan phyoga pa'i bahes gnyen chos
Egyus can du khas 'che ba dag na re .... tahad ma'i phyoga ni tshad badus
rhams las 'byung ba dag ches zhib cing dpyad pas rnam par dag la/ rige pa'i gter
ni shin tu etsings pas sgra li bzhin skyong mi nus pas slob rayud tshad Idan des
kyang ma byung ngo zhes zer mod/.



158
70Ibid., p. 100.2.
shakya-mchog-ldan, Dka' 'grel, .p. 443, implies as much through his meta-
phor of G.yag-ston as a skillful and fearless boat captain who recovers the long-
lost Jewel (of the Sa-skya and Ragog Pranana traditions) from its concealment in
the bed of a Jewel-lake. See above, note 60. The key line is yun ringe gab cing
nub par gyur, which indicates that the tradition was in decline for a long time-
1f this is not mere poetical fancy. Dr. L. van der Kuijp has also suggested to me
that G.yag-ston's activities may have been meant to counter the criticisms of the
Rigs gter by Bo-dong Pan-chen Phyoga-las-rnan-rgyal (1375-1451).
Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen in his gaan yig lists these eighteen, and
states that this enumeration became established in the time of G.yag-aton and Red-
mda'-ba at such places as Sa-skya and Ngan-ring. The eighteen are:
[Three treatises on Pranana]
1. Tshad ma'i mdo (Pramanasamuccaya)
2. Tahad na rnam 'grel (Pramaņavārttika)
3. Tahad ma rnam nges (Pranaņaviniscaya)
[Two Vinaya texts]
LE
4. 'Dul ba mdo
5. 'Dul ba mdo rtsa
[Two Abhidharma treatises]
6. Mngon pa kun las bus pa (Abhidharmasamuccaya)
7. Mngon pa mdzod (Abhidharmakosa)
[The five "Dharmas of Maitreya")
8. Mngon rtogs rgyan (Abhisamayalamkāra)
9. Mdo ade rgyan (Mahāyanasūtralaņkāra)
10. Dbu mtha' rnam 'byed (Madhyāntavibhāga)
11. Chos nyid rnam "byed (Dharmadharmavibhāga)
12. Rgyud bla ma (Ratnagotravibhanga)
[Prajnaparamita]
13. Phar phyin
[Three Madhyamaka treatises]
14. Dbu martsa ba shes rab (Mülamadhyamakakarikas)
15. Dbu ma la 'Jug pa (Madhyamakavatāra)
16. Dbu ma bzhi brgya pa (Catuhsataka)
[Two treatises of Sa-pap]
17. Rigs gter
18. Sdom gsum rab dbye



159
See Zhu-chen, Dpal Idan, vol. 1, pp. 103.5-104.1 (ka 520-b): Ele btsun sa akya
pa't batan 'dzin kun mkhyen 8.yag ston sangs rgyas dpal dang/ red mda! ba azhon nu
dpal dag i skabs su sa skya dang ngam ring soga su po ti graga chen bco brayad
kyi rnam azhag mdzad par
tshad ado rnas rel rnam nges tshad mali skor/
"dul ba ndo dang mdo rtsa dul ba'1 skor//
kun las btus dang mdzod gayis angon pa't skor//
byams chos Inga dang phar phyin dbu sa vi//
Itse tug bzhi su ches zab dbu ma'i skor/
sde bdun mdo bcas dgongs 'grel rigsl gter dang/
ade snod rayud sde kun 'grel sdom &sum ste//
puti grags chen bco brgyad zhes su grags//
"Glo-bo mkhan-chen, Sde bdun...nye bar mkho, p. 63.3 (3.3):
gzhung de nyid la'ang dpal ldan sa skya panditas [sic]//
riga tahul gsal bar dpyod ldan 'y yug pa//
rigs pa'i seng ge rigs pa grub pa dang//
rong ston chen pos rigs pa'i snang ba dang//
kun mkhyen lho pa sde bdun sal ba sdel
don si 'grel byed read byung rham gsum byung//
angon gyi mkhas pa rwa gragsstag rdor dang//
phyogs glang gsar ma dpal ldan seng ge dang//
10 btsun grags rgyal mkhas mchog nor bzang dpal//
mtshunga med blo gros gsal ldan gnas drug pa'i//
rnam bshad dang bcas tshi, si 'rrel pa drug//
tahig. don nyams pa med pa'i rangrel vin//
The first three (one can assume that dong-ston is meant instead of Rong-ston,
since here what is needed is a student of Sa-pan) as well as Dpal-dan-seng-ge and
Nor-bzang-dpal are known from the standard sources and lineage lists. Glo-bo
mkhan-chen in his Rigs gter commentary Sde bdun mdo...rnam bahad quotes from 'U-
yug-pa, Long-ston and Lho-pa. In a recent bibliographical list, Phyoga-glang-
gsar-me is asserted, perhaps erroneously, to have written a Rigs ter commentary.
See D. Jackson (1983), pp. 8f.
For references to other studies of Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal with Sa-pan see
Ngor-chen, Thob yig, pp. 49.4.2, 61.1.3, and 84.4.4. 'Jam-dbyangs-skya-bo is
Zhang's disciple also in these minor Tantric lineages.



Dalai bla-ma V Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-rgya-mtsho, Zab pa, vol. 1, pp. 37.5-
38.4 (ka 198.5-196.4). It is strange that the Fifth Dalai Lama here ascribed to
this same lineage also the origin of his bedus grwa tradition, though he does
acknowledge that the latter tradition spread from the time of such masters as
Phywa-pa and Gtsang-nag-pa. See ibid., p. 36.5 (ka 18b,5).
Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas (D), pp. 205.6ff.
''Peking Tibetan Tripitika, vol. 153, p. 158.5.3; Collected Works (New
Delhi: 1979), vol. ka, p. 286.4 (gsan yig, p. 285.4); (New Delhi, Gurudeva, 1978).
p. 283.2.
Mikhas-grub-rje, Mkhas grub thams, pp. 40f (46.6-50.1).
"Bu-ston, Bla ma dam pa, p. 39.4. Cf. the 'Jam-skya lineage, p. 56.3.
"Ibid., p. 38.6. Cf. the PVin lineage given in Shākya-mchog-Idan, Tshad
ma rnam, pp. 79-80:
Rngog lo-tsä-ba
Khyung-phrug Rin-chen-grags
Phyva-pa
Gtsang-aag-pa
Gnyal-zhig Jo-nam
Mkhas-pa Od-zer-mgon
'Jam dbyangs Shak-szhon
G.yag-sde Pan-chen
Rin-chen-tshul-khrims
Sangs-rgyas-chos-skyong
(Shakya-) mchog-Idan-legs-pa'1-blo
51Gos lo-tsa-ba, p. 308 (cha 9b), and G. Roerich tr. (1976), p. 346.
"Ibid.: 'di rhan 'rrel szhan rnams la mi snang bas/ nkhan chen rin po che
rayal mtahan bzang pos bad pa chen pos btsal bas rayed pa yin gsung ste/.
Kong-sprul, Theg pa'i sgo, pp. 561€ (op 203b). Here Kong-sprul seems to
say that Shar-pa Shes-rab-'byung-gnas, (Shar-pa) Rdo-r je 'od-zer, Nub-pa 'U-yug-pa
Rig(s)-pa'1-seng-ge, Gung-pa Skyo-ston-dri-med, and ("U-yug-pa's nephew) Nyi-thog-
pa Sangs-rgyas-kun-smon were all noteworthy immediate disciples of Sa-panin



161
Pramana, and that the latter had four chief disciples: Khang-ston 'Od-zer-rgyal-
mtshan, Gnyan Dar-ma-seng-ge, Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal, and Zur-khang-pa Dkar Shakya
grags-pa. But all nine of these are traditionally listed together as Sa-pan's
disciples who were "the upholders of the lineages of exposition" (bshad pa'l
brgyud dzin). On the lineage see also L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 118, and on
the classification of his disciples see ibid., pp. 1071,
p. 562 og 204a). See also L. van der Kuijp
Kong-sprul, Theg pa'i sgo,
(1983), p. 314, note 359.
Dalat bla-ma V Ngag-dbang-bla-bzang-rgya-mtsho, Zab pa, vol. 2, p. 131.4
(kha 661.4). A somewhat different record is preserved in Gong-dkar Phrin-las-
rnan-rgyal's esan yig: Thob vis bum pa bzang po. f. 221b (eda 170.1): rigester
rang'grel chos rie &.yag pa nas brgyud pa bshad pa dang bcas pa'i brgyud pa/
Jam-dbyangs Sa Pandita Chen-po
'Phags-pa
Zhang Dkon-mchog-dpal
*U-yug-pa Rigs-pa'i-seng-ge
'U-yus-pa Mdo-sde-dpal
Gu-ru Jam-dpal-rgyal-mtshan
Pang lo-sa-ba Blo-gros-brtan-pa
Brag-phug-pa
Bla-ma-dam-pa Beod-nams-rgyal-mtshan
Brtson-'grus-dpal
Dpal-ldan-tshul-khrims
Sa-bzang Phágs-pa Dkon-mchog-grags Shar-pa Ye-shes-
rgyal-atshan
Buddhashri
Mkhan-chen Sangs-rgyas-dpal
Bla-na Kun-dga'-bzang-po
Bla-na Shes-rab-dpal-1dan
Rje-btsun Thams-cad-mkhyen-pa-chen-po (-Gong-dkar-rdo-rje-gdan-pa)
Another somewhat differing lineage preserved within the Ngor-pa school is
listed by Zhu-chen, Dpal ldan, vol. 1, p. 106.2 (ka 535.2):
Sa-pan
Phags-
**U-ryg-pa



Zhang Dkon-mchog-dpal
Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal
Na-bza' Brag-phug-pa
Jan-skya Nam-mkha'-dpal-1dan
Jan-dbyangs Don-yod-rgyal-utshan Dpal Idan Blo-gros-brtan-pa
Slob-Apon 'Dul-"dzin-pa
Bla-na-dam-pa Bsod-nams-rgyal-mtshan
Chos-rje Byang-chub-seng-gea Dpal-dan-tshul-Ihrims
Shar-chen Ye-shes-rgyal-mtshan
Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po
86 Shakya-uchog-ldan, Michas pa, p. 100.2.
"See above, note 41. Mdong-ston (also spelled Long-aton) Shes-rab-dpal-
bzang-po was one of a group of thirteen senior disciples who had taken ordination
from Sa-pan. (This group also included Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal, though the latter also
appears in a group of nine disciples who upheld the lineages of explication. See
L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 107.) Mdong-ston was also active in transmitting a
Jigs-byed lineage, receiving it from Sa-pap and bestoving it on Phags-pa. See
Ngor-chen, Thob yig, p. 48.3.2.
Telu-ra-pa (also spelled Te-ra-pa) Byams-pa-ngon-po was one of four of Sa-
pan's closest disciples who were both learned and reverend (mkhas btsun avi thugs
sras bzhi).
But in the lineage presented by "Gos lo-tsā-ba (see below), two teachers
intervene between Jam-dbyangs-skya-bo and him. Nor-bzang was also alluded to in
Shakya-achog-ldan, Chos kyi 'khor, p. 469.5. See above, note 41.
"Ngag-dbang-chos-grags,
(1301.4).
Bod kyi mkhas (Thimphu edition),
p. 258.4
9 But Shakya-mchog-ldan, Chos kyi khor, p. 469.5, lista also Dar-ma-rin-
chen (Nya-dbon's uncle) as a great scholar of Pramiņa.
**Dalai bla-ma V Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-rgya-mtsho, Zab pa, vol. 2, p. 131
(kha 66a,6). Could he be the Baang-ldan-pa Dkon-mchog-grags-bzang who is men-
tioned in Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas. (Thimphu), p. 258.4? See also the
passage from the Fifth Dalai Lama's gaan yig cited above, 1. 85.



163
Y-Shakya-nchog-ldan, Mchas pa p. 100.1. This would seem to refer to the
Rigs ster commentary by Rgyal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen, which is not included in his
accessible collected works. The work does seem to survive in Leningrad as it was
used by Th. Stcher batsky. See above, chapter 2, section (3).
Ibid., p. 96.4. The second complaint must be taken with a grain of salt
because this was a very active period of Sa-skya-pa exegesis and scholarship.
Nevertheless, Shakya-mchog-Idan was indeed one of the few who took great pains to
trace back the purvapaksas of the Rigs gter in detail,



是一
1
,
2



Chapter 7
SA-PAN, RNGOG AND PHYWA-PA
ON THE INTERPRETATION OF DHARMAKIRTI
A basic canon of interpretation is that the exegete should explain his text
in its own terms and should not impose upon it a philosophy that is foreign to the
Intent of its author. This principle was accepted--in one form or another by the
Buddhist exegetes of India and Tibet. Yet there do exist cases where commentators
disagreed about which philosophy their author followed, a notable example being
the different interpretations of the works of Dharmakirti, the greatest of the
Indian Buddhist logicians. Th. Stcherbatsky in his classic study Buddhist Logic
described how in India there developed three main schools of interpreting Dharma-
kirti's Pramapa ("logico-epistemology"). There was a "philological school that
included Säkyamati, and a "philosophical school whose founder was Dharmottara.
Different from both of these was the so-called "religious" school founded by
Prajitäkaragupta." The first two schools were said by Tibetan doxographers to have
interpreted Dharmakirti's Pramapa works as representing ultimately a Yogacara
viewpoint, whereas the third was said to explain the ultimate intent of Dharma-
kirti as being the Madhyamaka.
Not as well known is the fact that in 12th- and 13th-century Tibet too
there existed some three different traditions of interpreting Dharmakirti." Each
was identified with an illustrious founder: Rngog lo-tsi-ba Blo-Idan-shes-rab
(1059-1109), Phyva-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge (1109-1169), and So-skya Pandita (1182-
1251). A key point of difference between them was how to classify the ultimate
intent of Dharmakirti in the last analysis was he a Yogācárin or a Madhyamika?
Since the positions of these three authors (and especially of Sa-pan) on this
question have yet to be studied in detail, I will present below some translations
of the materials that clarify the opinions of each.
Rngor lo-tsi-ba Blo-ldan-shes-rab
Rngog lo-tsa-ba more than anyone else was responsible for the founding of
Tibetan scholasticism. In addition to his prolific translation activities, he
established the main teaching lineages of the Dharmas of Maitreya (byams chos) and



166
the three eastern Indian treatises of the Svātantrika Madhyamaka (rang rgyud shar
gsum). And as previously mentioned, he founded an influential school of Pramāņa
studies. Regarding the latter, it is said that he translated the PV with the
Pramāpālapkāra of Prajñākaragupta and the PVin with Dharmottara's commentary, and
that by expounding these (especially the PVin with commentary), he established a
teaching line which lasted well over five hundred years in Tibet.
Rngog interpreted Dharnakirti as a Mādhyanika. Our main sources for
Rngog's opinions are the writings of Shakya-mchog-ldan, a 15th-century Sa-skya-pa
scholar who originally had studied at Rngog's old monastic seat, Goang-phu Ne'u-
thog. According to Shakya-mchog-ldan's History of Pramapa:
[Rngog] explained the PV as Madhyamaka according to the intent of
[Prajfläkaragupta's) (PV) Alapkāra. And as for the Pin, ſhe explained
the ultimate as higher than the Mind--Only [i.e Yogācāra) because it
rests in (1.e. is consonant vith?] just what was said in the passage of
the fourth consideration of the fruit [of cognition). [but having
retained as they were the separate passages of the Sautrāntika and
Mind-Only.
There are, nevertheless, tvo videly recognized traditions originating
in India for the exposition of the Dharmas of Maitreya and its fol-
lowers: (1) exposition according to learning and reflection, and (2)
exposition according to meditative cultivation. From among these, the
tradition of the Great Translator [Rngog) was mainly just the former.
Therefore he expounded the identification of all three insubstantiali-
ties (bdag, med nairātmya) too as just non-presuppositional and non-
implicative negation med dag), since the emptiness established
through learning and reflection is merely non-presuppositional and non-
implicative negation. And regarding (that exposition], he held that
also the identification of the ultimate truth here too in the context
of Maitreya's Dharmas and in the context of the author of the PV was,
on the level of transactional usage, entirely beyond the scope of mind.
[Question:) If the Great Translator commented on the PV as Madhyama-
ka, which did he explain it as--the two known as Prasangika and Svätan-
trika, or that which is known as the Madhyamaka (which maintains that]
the cognitive image [is] false (rnam brdzun dbu ma)?
[Answer:) Since he based himself just on the reasoning of the
author of the PV, he did not comment on it according to the traditions
of Prasangika or Svātantrika. Nor was it that latter tradition, for he
did not expound the identification of emptiness as being Ghosts (ye



shes) according to the expository system of the traditions of medita-
tive cultivation of the Dharmas of Maitreya.
[Doubt:) If it is none of those traditions, there do not exist any
other commentarial systems of the Madhyamaka.
Answer:] This way of commenting is another great doctrinal system
that does not rely upon those previous founders of systems. For he
said the following in his Spring yig bdud rtsi this pa:
"After clearly understanding that entrance gate into the principle
of all factors of existence being empty of own natures--which is
the highest of correct reasonings taught by Nagarjuna--from the
beautiful works of the author of the (Pramagavärttika who has
reached perfection in reasoning, one should abandon all other
traditions like straw."
I [Shakya-mchog-ldan) have seen only a few of the investigations he
made of the Alapkāra commentary on the PV, whereas he refuted many
points in the exposition of Dharmottara that he took to be unaccept-
able, having retained as they were those passages) he thought were
acceptable. 10
Thus according to Shakya-mchog-Idan (and the quote from Rngog's own work).
the Great Translator linked the thought of Dharmakirti to Nagarjuna, though with-
out identifying it as belonging to any later Madhyamaka school. This was the
opinion of Shakya-mchog-Idan late in his life when at age 73 (1501) he wrote that
History of Pramäpa. Nineteen years previous to that, however, Shakya-uchog-ldan
in his subcommentary (rnam bshad) on the Rigs gter linked Rngog to the Yogācāra-
Madhyamaka of Santarakṣita:
Having executed translations, editions, and subcommentaries on a large
scale, he explained (the ultimate import of Dharnakirti's Pramana) as
the Madhyamaka which accords with the basic treatises of Santa-
rakṣita. 11
Probably still earlier in his 11e (c. 1475-1480?), Shakya-uchog-ldan
portrayed the interpretation of Rngog in more general terms in his history of
Rngog lo-tsa-ba and the latter's successors:



168
[Rngog understood the ultimate intent (uthar thug ai dgonge pe of
Dharmakirti to be in agreement with Nāgārjuna. And as for his identifi-
cation of the definitive meaning (nges don), he explained it as empti-
ness of both apprehended object and apprehending subject] in its
aspect of non-presuppositional and non-implicative negation (med dges).
Regarding the commentaries of ] Dharmottara and Prajñākaragupta, he
refuted those parts that were contradictory and explained the agreeing
parts according to his [i.e. Nāgär juna's?) system.
Elsewhere Shakya-mchog-Idan summarized Rngog's basic approach in this way:
He revealed the nectar of emptiness, having interpreted the system of
the reasoning of the author of the Pramāpavarttika as that great tradi-
tion, the theory of the excellent system of Nagarjuna.
Finally, in his incomplete commentary on the Khd, Shakya-uchog-ldan de-
scribed the tradition of "Rngog together with his followers" (i.e. including
Phywa-pa?) as follows:
The Pramana treatises of Dignāga and his chief successor (Dharmakirti)
were, in general, spread very much by Rngog lo-tsa-ba together with
those who followed in his lineage. But as for the way in which they
spread it, they let stand the accepted consensus of the world (re-
garding the mechanism of perception] because the manners of exposition
of Sautrāntika and Mind-Only which occur in the basic text itself were
not the purport of the author i.e. of Dharmakirti). And from among
commentators (on the PV], they [accepted) merely the master of the (PV)
Alankara [Prajakaraguptal, and except for him did not consider the
others as definitive (or: as decisive, mtha' gcig tu), besides (using)
merely an abridgment of their best points.
As for their own manner of exposition, regarding the system of the
surface level, they let stand just the innate consensus of the world.
They applied that reasoning taught in the PV of "devoid of oneness and
manyness" as being Just a reasoning) which establishes all knowable
things as empty of own-nature (rang stong). Regarding the ultimate
truth which is the thing to be experienced, they applied that to just
the non-dual gnosis and expounded it as being part of the Without-own-
nature [1.e. the Madhyamaka), in agreement with Santarakṣita. And as
for the system of the "exclusion of other" (anyapoha), logical connec-



tion and incompatibility, definition and defined, etc., they explained
them as best they could through just their own powers of discernment,
not relying on other commentators. And [Rngog?] expounded (Pramāņa) at
length, having pledged to compose the treatise with these words:
I shall exactly ascertain the difficult points of the real facts
of Pramäņa which are not well and exactly clarified even in the
minds of other composers of treatises.
16
Shakya-mchog-Idan perhaps could not give a more detailed account since many of
15
Rngog's works were apparently no longer available in his time.
Phywa-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge
The school of Rngog was for nearly half a century the sole Interpreter of
Dharmakirti in Tibet. Then, in the mid-12th century, a great Tibetan dialectician
appeared within Rngog's own school who reinterpreted Buddhist Pramana according to
his own acute but idiosyncratic understandings. This great dialectician was
Phywa-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge.
Phywa-pa is said to have written a commentary on the PVin as well as
independent treatises such as his famous "Summary" (badus pa), the Tshad ma vid
kyi mun sel. The latter work, in its brief, medium and expansive versions, soon
eclipsed the tradition of Rngog's own explanations, and for some two generations
it was the most influential work on Pramāņa in Tibet. This was possible because
Rngog had not written extensively or in great detail on Praniņa; Rngog's succes-
sors had much room in which to improvise.
According to Shakya-mchog-ldan's History of Pramapa, Phywa-pa's interpreta-
tions of Dharmakirti were strange indeed:
Having explained the ultimate intent of Dharmakirti as abiding in the
principle of the absence of own-nature (nihsvabhāva, 1.e. as Madhyama-
ka), [Phywa-po) expounded the identification of the definitive meaning.
emptiness, as just non-presuppositional and non-implicative negation.
And he explained the reasoning of ) absence of oneness and manyness as
that which establishes that [emptiness). Regarding the matters he
established or confuted, there are very many excellent cases where he
let stand as they were the statements in the main commentators and also
[commented according to however it occurred to his own skills of
discernment. He paid no heed whatsoever to the Sautrantika and Mind



170
Only scriptural traditions occurring in Dharmakirti which refute or
establish external objects; rather, he took them as the target for his
refutations. Having done so, he made the system of transactional usage
of his own school to accord with worldly consensus and the Vaibhaşikas.
But in doing so he did not accord with the Prāsangika Madhyamaka, for
he wrote extremely extensive refutations of the opinions of that
school. 18
A similar account is found in Shakya-mchog-ldan's commentary on the Tshad ma rise
pa'i gter (Rige ster) of Sa-pap. Here Phyva-pa is described as the famous origi-
nator in Tibet of the custom of writing general, thematic commentaries as aids for
the teaching of Dignaga and Dharmakārti's writings. His best-known work is again
said to have been the Tshad ma yid kyi mun sel. In it:
He [Phywa-pa) explained as being purely unacceptable all the ways of
expositions of the systems of the surface level of the Sautrantika,
Säkāra (Mind-Only] and Nirākära Mind-Only, refuting them through his
own reasoning. He set forth his own system as follows: He accepted
that an object is cognized by a cognition in which the object appears,
in a way that is bare and without a cognitive image, like the Vaibhasi-
ka [accepts), and said of that tradition that it was in accord with
worldly consensus. And as for the way in which he set forth emptiness,
the ultimate reality, this he explained according to the system of
those who maintain no own-nature (1.e. the Madhyamikas). [teaching)
that all factors of existence are empty of own-nature, and not ac
cepting even the slightest thing that could be termed a "veridically
established factor." And he expounded the nature of emptiness as Just
non-presuppositional and non-implicative negation, and affirmed that
that (emptiness) too was something which was critically discernable
(dpyad bzod by means of reasoning. 19
Later in the same work:
That reasoning of Phyva-pa which said "(We) refute the Sakāra school by
means of Vaibhaşika reasoning and the reasoning of worldly consensus,
and refute the Nirakara Mind-Only by means of Madhyamaka reasoning, and
then explain the seven Pramāņa treatises (of Dharmakirti) as being in
accord with worldly consensus" ignores all the excellent expositions in
the basic treatises and merely puts together with great real what had



not been expounded. 20
Still again near the end of that work Shakya-achog-ldan described the approach of
Phyva-pa in similar terms:
The lord of Dharma, the lion of reasoning (Phya-pa Chos-kyi-seng-ge),
in the treatises called The Elimination of Mental Darkness (vid kyi mun
sel refuted the two traditions of Sautrântika and Mind-Only, and
explained the seven treatises (of Dharmakirti) as the 'Jig-rten-grags-
sde-spyod-pa'i Dbu-ma.41
Sa-skya Pandita Kun-dga'-rgyal-mtshan
Thus a few decades after Rngog's death, a second and distinctively Tibetan
school of epistemology had grown up. This school for a time had no effective
rival, and it would have exercised an even longer and deeper influence on Tibetan
scholasticism had it not been vigorously opposed some two generations later by Sa-
skya Pandita. Sa-paņ vas an all-around scholar, but if he was more erudite in any
one branch of scholastics, it was probably in Pramāpa, one of the most arduous
subjects of all.
As already described above in some detail, Sa-pan received his first de-
tailed instructions on Pranana from the age of nineteen to twenty-one from Rkyang-
'dur-ba Meshur zhon-nu-seng-ge, who belonged to the tradition of Phywa-pa's
student Gtsang-nag-pa Brtson-'grus-seng-ge. At that time Sa-pap studied the
PVin (and according to Shakya-uchog-ldan, the Pranana Summary of Phyva-pa). He
18 said to have made quick progress, and he was no doubt well on his way to
becoming a teacher in this tradition when suddenly there opened up a chance to
study in a completely different tradition. What happened was that in 1204 after
Sa-paņ had studied Pramana for about three years, the renowned Kashmiri pandita
Sakya ribhadra (11277-1225) arrived in Tibet accompanied by an entourage of nine
other accomplished scholars from East India, Nepal and Kashmir. These scholars
belonged to the last generation of savants who had studied and taught in the great
Buddhist monastic seminaries of Magadha, the heartland of Buddhism. Only a few
years earlier, Turkic brigands had sacked the great seminaries as Nalanda and
Vikramasila, thus destroying the foremost centers of Indian Buddhist learning and
dispersing their scholars. For Sa-pan, however, these disastrous developments
created a uniquely favorable opportunity.



172
The young and gifted Sa-pap threw himself whole-heartedly into Sanskrit
and Pramaņa studies with the visiting teachers. By the end of the decade he had
assiduously studied in Sanskrit all the fundamental Pranka scriptures and had
become a full-fledged translator who worked with SakyasrIbhadra himself in re-
translating Dharmakirti's greatest work, the Pv. When Säkyasri departed from
Tibet in 1213-1214 at the end of his ten-year visit, Sa-pan had become one of the
greatest Tibetan experts on Pramāņa of all time. Some five years later (e.
1219) he is said to have composed his monumental Tshad ma rigs pa't gter (Rigs
gter with autocommentary (rang 'grel).
As Shakya-mchog-Idan observes, the tradition Sa-paņ received through his
studies with the Indian masters was "not adulterated by Tibetan explanations."
Through these studies:
[Sa-pan) saw that the explanations in the Pramapa Summaries [of Phyva-
pa and others) that had previously appeared were not in accord with the
basic scriptures. Thereafter he composed his Tshad ma rige ster with
commentary, which was the first beginnings of a tradition of teaching a
topical summary (badus pa'i srol) of Pranana in which the scriptural
traditions of Sautrintika and Mind-Only were retained just as they
Were, 29
Sa-pan's immediate motive for composing his Rigs gter was to correct the misinter-
pretations of Phywa-pa and his followers:
If one expounds as above (1.e. as Phyva-pa had done), one will have
affirmed the main doctrine that is opposed to the fundamental works of
Dignaga and Dharmakirti. The reasons are as follows: Those works
explain as their own system that very position of the Sautrantika as
long as external objects are affirmed, and they refute the accepted
worldly conceptions and opinions maintained by the Vaibhäpikas. When
external objects are negated, those texts at first remain within the
tradition of the Sakāra Mind-Only, establishing all appearing phenomena
as the mind through the reasons of "illumination and awareness" (gsal
zhing rig pe) and "necessary concomitance of the simultaneously appre-
hended" (Than cig dmige nges). In the end they take as their basis
that which is the system of those who consider the cognitive image to
be false [1.e. the Allkākāra], and establish (mind) as vithout the
duality of apprehending subject and apprehended object.



[Phywa-pa) taught that all factors are empty of own-nature (rang
stong). He ultimately did not affirm any veridically established
factor, and he expounded the identification of emptiness as an aspect
of non-presuppositional and non-implicative negation. But since these
teachings do not appear in the great doctrinal system of Maitreya's
fundamental scriptures as explained by Asanga and his brother, they
were not taught also in the fundamental works of Dignaga and Dharma-
kirti. Therefore the refutation of those points is the direct motive
for this treatise (the Tshad ma rigs ster)."
One of the key differences between Phywa-pa and Sa-pap on Pramāṇa had to do
with the number of objects of apprehension that each accepted. In contrast to the
threefold scheme of Phyva-pa, Sa-paņ held that the object of knowledge through
perception is only one: the svalakşana, and he quotes PV III 53d to this
effect." In the course of replying to the objections of others concerning this
point, Sa-pap in his Rigs &ter rang'grel discusses three main topics, viz. (1)
the general arrangement of Indian philosophical schools with regard to the ulti-
mate objects of knowledge (which for many schools is an underlying causal or
ontological entity), (2) a refutation of the non-Buddhist opinions regarding the
above, and (3) the establishment of the Buddhist tradition. Regarding the
first, he lists geven major philosophical schools of India, from among which four
are non-Buddhists and three Buddhist:
(1) Those (followers of the Carvāka) who hold that "natures" (svabhava) are
the causes and that all reality arises from the predetermined nature of
things (i.e. not from a separate cause).
(2) Followers of Isvara. They hold that reality was created by Isvara.
(3) Followers of the Samkhya. They hold that reality is created by
pradhana.
(4) Followers of Kanada, 1.e., the Vaiseșikas. They hold that the world is
made up of "atoms" (1.e. minute indivisible particles).
(5) The Srävakas. They too hold that the world is made of "atos."
(6) The followers of the Mind-Only (1.e. of Yogacara). They maintain that
the world is mind,
(7) The followers of the Madhyamaka. They maintain that on the ultimate
Level all is free fron discursive elaboration, and on the surface level
they follow either those schools that maintain existent entities or that
maintain a position which accords with worldly consensus.”



174
After rejecting the positions of the first three non-Buddhist schools, Sa-
paņ arrives at part three, the establishment of the tradition of the Sugata. This
has two main parts: (1) the identification of the Buddha's Intent, and (2) how
that was specifically established by the Acarya (Dharmakirti). The Sage (1.e. the
Buddha) affirmed "atoms" when he investigated exterior objects. When he investi-
gated the reality (de kho na nyid: tattva) of transactional usage (tha anyad :
vyavahāra), he affirmed mind alone. And when he engaged the reality of the ulti-
mate truth, he engaged in that which is free from discureive elaborations."
Now, the real question is where the author of the PV fits into this scheme.
Sa-paņ states that the Acarya's i.e. Dharmakirti's) procedure for establishing
the Buddha's intent involved two things: objective cognition (don ris) and
"mental cognition" (rnam rig: viñapti). As for the first, he states: "When one
affirms external objects, one must maintain the tradition of the Sautrantika."
But before explaining the second, Sa-pan tells how to negate the "constructions"
(1.e. the tenets) of others. For instance, one can analyze the Vaibhaşika notion
of a substance that possesses parts through the reasoning of "absence of oneness
and manyness." Similarly one analyzes and rejects more subtle entities, such as
the "atons" of the Vaiseșikas and the Srävakas, through the reasoning of "the
simultaneous conjunction of six l'atoms'l". According to Sa-pan, however, it
does not accord with the Pranāņa tradition to base oneself on worldly consensus as
in the Prasangika tradition of Candrakirt1.40
As for the actual establishing of "mental cognition" (rnam rig: vijñapti)
Sa-paņ states: "When investigating means of knowledge within transactional usage
(kun tu tha snyad pat sayavahāra), one should follow the authors of the Sutra
(1.e the Prananasamuccaya) and the [Pranaņa] Varttika. Specifically, this is
to establishmental cognition by means of two proofs: (1) "illumination and
awareness" (sal zhing rig pa) and (2) "the necessary concomitance of simultaneous
apprehension" (lhan cig dmiss nges). Sa-pan here also defends cognition or mind
against opponents such as Madhyamikas who criticize it as being subject to nega-
tion] like an aton." He furthermore denies that the presence or absence of the
cognitive image (rnam pa: akára) is of any relevance to the discussion at hand
since all that is meant to be established here is that it is just the mind that
appears as the object. Sa-paņ does, however, discuss the difference between the
Säkära and Nirakara schools later, in chapter nine, which deals with perception
(mngonsum: pratyakşa). There in one passage he again sums up his position
regarding the philosophical classification of Dharmakirti:
Thus from among the four philosophical schools, the Acarya Dharma-
kirti) followed the Souträntikas when he affirmed external objects, and



he maintained the Nirākāra when the object of knowledge was "Inter-
nalized" (nang la jus pa).44
In spite of such clear statements in the Rigs gter rang'grel itself and
also from the main commentators on the Rigs gter, there are still those who say
that Sa-paņ Interpreted Dharmakirti as being other than a Yogacarin. For example
Kong-sprul in his Shes bya kun khyab asserts (without citing his source) that Sa-
pon commented on Dignaga and Dharmakirti as being in accord with Yogācāram
avatantrika-madhyamaka, as established by Santarakṣita. This we did not find in
the Riga gter. However, even in the Sa-skya-pa tradition some scholars have
made similar assertions, though more carefully worded. Glo-bo mkhan-chen Bsod-
nans-Thun-grub, for instance, states: "In the opinion maintained by this great
e. Sa-pan), the ultimate intent expounded by Dharmakirti in the PV is
precisely the Madhyamaka that agrees with the system of Arya Nagarjuna. In
this connection Glo-bo nkhan-chen cited PV I 220a and also the famous verse from
Rngog lo-tsa-ba's Spring yig bdud rtsi thig pa.
This characterization by Glo-bo mkhan-chen deserves careful consideration
since he made it when commenting on Sa-pan's own words in the Mkhas pa roams ug
pa' sgo (KhJ III 48, autocommentary). In that passage, Sa-pan performs a series
of philosophical analyses and negations, much like those in the Rigs ster. de-
scribed above. Yet whereas in the Rigs gter the analysis stopped when he reached
vijnapti, here in the Kh he does not stop at that. Instead, he goes on to say:
48
Therefore, having established cognition (roam rig: viinapt )the basis
for transactional usage, [now) for the sake of establishing the ulti-
mate truth, which is beyond transactional usage...."
Next Sa-paņ quotes the Lahkávatāra Sūtra, the PV (II 252cd, 253ab), and the
Yuktişastika (v.29) of Nagarjuna. The point he makes through these verses and his
subsequent comment is that non-dual cognition is dependent, momentary, and born
from conditions. Since being born from conditions is the absence of genuine,
independent birth, in ultimate reality the "birthless-ultimate reality free from
discursive elaborations--18 established. Then after quoting the Anavataptanaga-
rāla pariprccha Sutra (Rgya mtshos zhus pa), Sa-paņ concludes:
Therefore the intent of the author of the Pranapavārttika is that if
one understands well "cognition" (vi liapti). one will understand the
undistorted reality of the Madhyamaka.1



Thus, though in his main work on Pramaņa, the Rige ster rang 'grel, Sa-pan
does not allow himself to interpret Dharmakirti as a Madhyamika, here in the KhJ
he does. What could account for this? It seems that Sa-pan in the Rise &ter rang
'grel never directly concerns himself with explaining the "ultimate intent" (mthar
thug si dgonga pa) of Dharmakirti. Rather, what he attempts to explain is Dharma-
kirti's teachings on the "means of knowledge of transactional usage" (tha snyad
kyi tahad ma* or the "reality of transactional usage" (tha snyad kyl de kho
na), which is to say the ultimate within the sphere of purposive action and
practical application. This is not, however, the means of knowledge of the Buddha
or saint (pha rol szigs pa'i tshad ma). Elsewhere in the Rigs gter, rang 'grel,
Sa-paņ specifies that his topic is not the ultimate truth that is free from
discursive elaborations (spros bral svi don dam). Instead, what is in question is
the ultimate truth that is causally efficacious (don byed nus pa' don dan), 1.e.
the ultimate truth of the Pramana teachings proper.
In the Khy, however, the goal of the series of ontological analyses and
dissolutions was the ultimate truth that is free from discursive developments.
Even in the Rige ster this level of truth is explained as being the ultimate
Intent of the Buddha." And now here in the KhJ Sa-pan asserts that what Dharma-
kirti had in mind in teaching viffiapti was that by understanding it, one will come
to understand the ultimate truth of the Madhyamaka. Evidently Sa-paņ means to say
amana, with its Mind-Only tenets, was in the last analysis a propaedeutic,
and that this was understood by Dharmakirti.
Such a characterization of the Pramāņa of Dharmakirti is not, however,
actually made explicit in the Rigs gter rang 'grel. When commenting on the
Pramāna tradition directly, Sa-pan seems to prefer to stay within what he took
to be the framework of that system. There he classifies Dharukirti as a Nirakara
Yogacárin. In this sense, Shakya-mchog-Idan was right in saying of Sa-pan:
In particular, he refuted the tradition of [Phywa-pa's) Summaries by
explaining the ultimate theory of the PV as Nirakarin and [explaining)
the provisional theory in exact accord with the Sautrântika and Mind-
Only scriptures. 59
Whatever the final answer to this problem may be, it will not be reached by
uncritically citing the doctrinal classifications laid down by later scholars from
other traditions. It would also be wrong to try to base one's answer on just a
passage or two of his translations or revisions. To do justice to the problem,
one would really have to study all available passages in his works that deal with
this subject. Since the Rige ster with its autocommentary is the main source for



understanding Sa-pap's thought on Pramana, one's primary task should naturally be
to ascertain what he said there.
Perhaps in the future someone will be able to interpret the Rige ster rang
grel differently from how I have outlined above. This is probably to be ex-
pected, and it may even come as a welcome advance. But as Go-rans-pa said in a
related context:
Those who explain the intended sense of the Rigs gter as other than
this must show where that is in the Rigs gter or its (auto.com
60
mentary.



178
NOTES
F. Th. Stcherbatsky (1930-32), vol. 1, pp. 39-42. He states, p. 40, that
the "philosophical" school can also be termed the "Cashmerian" or "critical"
school.
-Ibid., vol. 2, pp. 42-45. Stcherbatsky, p. 43, explains: "The aim of the
Prampa-värttika, according to this school, was not at all to comment upon Dig-
naga's Pramăpa-samuccaya, which work was a purely logical treatise, but to comment
upon the whole of the Mahāyāna Scripture which establishes the existence, the
omniscience and other properties of the Buddha...
L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 272, note 98, cites two Tibetan authors--
Mkhas-grub-rje and Shakya-mchog-ldan--as agreeing on this point.
ce. the three Tibetan schools of Pranapa interpretation, all three of
which are said to have interpreted it as Madhyamaka [!), mentioned by Kong-sprul
Blo-gros-mtha'-yas in his Thes pa sgo, vol. op. p.204a: briod bya gtan la phab
pa'i don la dgonge nas [1] rngor lo chen pos ngo be nyid med par smra ba'i dbu ma/
(2) sa luga pa nams kyis rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu ma/ (3) gzhan dag phal mo che
118 rten krage sde apyod pa'i dbu mer bkral te bod kyi 'grel tshul gaum mo//. I
wonder what source Kong-sprul was basing himself on here.
Some preliminary studies on the Pramāņa traditions in Tibet during these
centuries are L. van der Kuijp (1978), (1979), and (1983).
For brief descriptions of the opinions of Rngog and Phyva-pa on this
point, see L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 50 and 63, respectively.
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 29.2. It was his Pin lineage in
particular that survived and exercised a long-lasting influence.
Before Rngog-lo, there survived from the early propagation period (snga
dar mainly just Abhidharms and Vinaya lineages, though from the mid-11th century
there apparently began among the early Bka'-gdans-pa the study of six major scrip-
tures, the so-called Bkal adams ezhung drug:
(1) Skyes rabs (Jätaka)
(2) Ched du br fod pa't tahoms (Udanavarga)
(3) Byang sa (Bodhisattvabhūmt)



179
(4) Sdo sde rgyan (Mahāyānasūtrālapkāra)
(5) Spyod jug (Bodhisattvacaryavatāra)
(6) Balab btus (Śikṣasamuccaya)
This "fourth section" refers to PV III 353-367, and the parallel passage
in the PVin. According to L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 287, note 182, this four-
fold division as a means for PV interpretation was first attested in the Rigs xter
rang'grel, but its locus classicus seems to have been the Madhyamakalapkira.
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tahad ma rigs, p. 492.4, explains that Rngog (along with
Prajñākaragupta, Santarakṣita, and Kamalasila) took Dharmakirti to follow a "Great
Madhyamaka" (dbu ma chen po because in the PV there are taught three types of
nairātmya. Cf. L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 36, 274.
°C. Rigs gter rang'grel, p. 237.1.5: stong syid med dgag tu bagrub pa
na..., apparently a reference to Rngog lo-tsi-ba.
Shakya-nchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 30.3. This quote also occurs in
Shākya-tchog-Idan, Spring yig, p. 322.7, and in Glo-bo mkhan-chen, KhJNSh, P.
287.3. Presumably the readings in Shakya-mchog-Idan's Spring yig are more autho-
ritative since the latter was a commentary on Rngog's work, and Shakya-mchog-Idan
probably had a copy of the text before him when writing it (and was not quoting
from memory).
Here is the text with variants (S- Spring yig, T- Tshad ma'1 mdo, and K-
KhJNSH):
chos ras rang bzhin stong pali tshul la ug pali sgo//
yang dag rigs tshoga klu sgrub zhal nas gsungs pa de//
rige pa'i thar thus rnam srel mdzad pali szhung mdzes las/
Asal bar rtogs nas luge ngan gzhan kun rtsa bzhin dor//
1 rnams ST: kun K; stong pa't ks: med pa'i T
2 tshogs S: mchog KT; zhal ST: zhabs K; nas S: las T: kyis K; gsungs pa KS: 'byung
ba T; de SK: gang T
3 mthar thug ST: dbang phyug K; wdzes S: bzang KT
4 gsal bar ST: legs par K
If we follow the text of S above, the translation of line 2 should read
"collection of reasonings" instead of "the highest of correct reasonings." The
"collection of reasonings" (rige tshogs) is the so-called Yukti-corpus which is
made up of Nagarjuna's five or six main theoretical scholastic works. See D.
Seyfort Ruegg (1981), p. 8. Probably rtswa "straw, grass" is to be read instead
of rta in line 4. Cf. Go-rams-pa, Royal ba thams, p. 177.5: bzhi mdo'i rtswa



180
bzhin dor bar bya'o/ : Sa-pan. Char lo, p. 336.1.6: sgro yi rnam azhag rtewa ltar
dor nas ni/l.
shākya-nchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 29.3-30.4. Cf. L. van der Kuijp
(1983), pp. 50, 52. For the Tibetan text see also ibid., pp. 49-51. Van der
Kulp, p. 35, speculates that Shakya-mchog-ldan's discussion of Rngog's interpre-
tation is motivated by a desire to discredit the Dga'-ldan-pa, but he offers no
justification for this.
For another brief summary of Rngog's Pramāņa system, see Glo-bo mkhan-chen,
Sde bdun mdo...phyogs snga, pp. 52.2-54.2 (26b.2-276.2).
Shakya-mchog-ldan, Rigs gter rnam bshad, p. 745:
'grel mdzad blo la ma shar rige pa'i gsang//
gsal mdzad blo ldan phrin las bzang po yis /
syur dang zhus chen rnam bshad rgyas mdzad nas//
zhi mtsho'i gzhung dang mthun pa'i dbu mar bkral//
Cf. Shakya-mchog-ldan, Dbu ma rnam, vol. 15, p. 457.3, where Prajňákaragupta,
Santarakita and Rngog are listed together as similarly interpreting Dharnakirti's
purport.
Kuijp
Shakya-mchog-ldan, Rngog lo, p. 449.6-450.1. Cf. L. van der
(1983), p. 46. For the Tibetan text see also ibid., p. 286, note 174.
*Shakya-mchog-Idan, Sa skya nje, pp. 92.5-93.1. Cf. van der Kuijp (1983),
D. 29. For the Tibetan text see also ibid., p. 268, note 71. There is an elabo-
rate pun in this verse. The other translation is: "Having guided the
chariot ... to that great track ...."
"Shakya-mchog-ldan, Mkhas pa, pp. 95f: phyoge glangs vab sras kyl tshad
ma't batan bcos n/rngor lo brgyud par bcas pa dag gis spyi tsom nas shin tu dar
barmdzad mod/ dar tahul ni gzhung nyid du 'byung ba'i ndo sems kyl 'chad tshul
de mdzad pa po'ldgonge pa ma yin pas na llig rten si grage pa sorios padang/
grel mdzad dag las kyang rayan gyi mkhan po tsan ma stogs gzhan la lege btus team
min pa mtha scia tu mi rtsi ba dang/ rang si 'chad tshul kun rdzobkyi roam
szhag iis rten lhan skyes la grags pa nyid thad sorog pa dang/ rnam 'grel du
acie du bral syirige pa gsungs pa de shes bya mtha' dag rang atong gia gtan la
'bebs byed nyid du sbyor ba dang/ nyams su myong bya'i don dam bden pa ni enyis
[96] med kyi ye shes nyid la sbyar nas ngo bo nyid med pa'i nang tshan zhi 'taho
soga dang mthun par 'chad pa dang/ gzhan sel dang/ 'sal 'brel dang/ mtshan



mtshon syl ram gzhag soge grel mdzad azhan la ma rag par/ rang kho na'i tham
dpyod kyis Etsal thon du mázad pa yin te/ 11 skad du/
gzhung rtson rnams kyi blo la yang//
11 bzhin legs par si asal ba//
tshad ma'i de nyid dka' ba rnams//
i bzhin du ni rnam nges bya//
zhes rtsom par dam bcas nas rgyas par 'chad pa yin la/
*Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i ndo, P, 29.2, observes that even though fev
of the treatises by (early] Tibetan masters are extant, the practice of writing
extensive original treatises began with Rngog, and numerous works of Ragog such as
his PVin pah fikā have been listed in [Bu-ston's] history of religion (chos
byung). The latter history would seem to be Shakya-achog-ldan's main source of
information about the full corpus of Rngog's writings, and not the writings them
selves:
spyir bod kyi mkhan pos batan 'chos mdzad pa cha shas tsan las med na yang
bdag nyid chen po 'di nas bstan 'chos rgyas par mdzad pa'i dbu tshuge nas rnam P
nes pa'1 dka! 'grel sogs chos 'byung gi dkar chag tu tshud pali rtog reli chos
phran du ma dag mdzad.
Elsewhere (Rngos lo, p. 446.7) Shakya-achog-Idan enumerates Rngog's works
based on the list In Bu-ston's Chos 'byung. Cf. S. Nishioka (1983), P. 118. In
yet another place he appears to quote an opening verse from a commentary by Rngog.
See above, note 14.
Rngog's commentarial summaries of the Ratnapotravibhāsa and Abhi samayalam
kāra are still extant. See above, chapter 6, note 8.
""On Phywa-pa (also spelled Phya-pa and Cha-pa), see L. van der Kuijp
(1978), passion, and (1983), pp. 59-84.
"Shakya-achog-ldan, Dka' 'grel, P. 443.4:
de vi rnam bahad tshig nyung bas//
rjestus rnams kyis azhan dulang brtags//
Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 33.1-33.5. C. L. van der Kuijp
(1983), p. 63. For another brief summary of Phya-pa's Pranapa system, see now
Glo-bo mkhan-chen, Sde bdun mdo... phyogs snga, p. 54.2-5 (27b.2-5).
The school of Candrakirti is characterized as according with "commonly
accepted worldly usage" or "worldly consensus" is rten syi srase po lokapra.
siddha), and was hence sometimes called the Grags-sde-spyod-pa'1-dbu-na. Here



182
Shakya-nchog-Idan specifies that Phywa-pa followed the commonly accepted usage of
the world, but did not in fact adhere to the Präsahgika school of Candrakirti.
See also Shakya-achog-Idan, Rngog lo, p. 451.4, where Phyva-pa's refutations of
Candrakirti's teachings are mentioned. Cf. below, note 20. Tibetan doxographers
did not always identify the Grags-se-spyod-pa'1-dbu-ma with the Präsangka. See
K. Mimaki (1982), p. 28, and (1983), p. 162.
"Shakya-achog-ldan, Tshad ma rigs, pp. 452.6-453.2: mdo ade pa dang/ sens
tsan ruam bcas pa dang/ rnam rdzun pa asum svi kun rdzob kyi rnam azhag 'chad
tahul mtha' dag rang gi rige pas sun phyung ba'1 sgo nas od 'thad pa nyid du rnan
par bshad nas rang gi lugs 10g tshul/ bye brag tu smra ba itar don snang si
shes pas [453) don stora tahul rnam med jen chargyi tahul khas blangs teluge
de ni 118 rten kyi grags. pa dang mthun pa'oll zhes zer zhing/ don dam stong
nyid kyi jog tshul yang ngo bo nyid med par sura ba'i tahul Itar bshad nas/ chos
tham8 cad rang 81 ngõ boy stong Pa dang/ bden par grub pa'i chọn zhes by ba cung
zad kyang khas mi len pa dang/ stong nyid kyi ngo bo med dgar kho na la 'chad
cing de yang rigs pas dpyad bzod du khas len par byed do.
Sa-pan and Rngog held that the ultimate was beyond the scope of mind, and
not "something that can undergo being critically discerned through reasoning"
(rige pas dpyad bzod). See for instance 'Gos lo-tsa-ba, P. 309.6 (G. Roerich
[1976), p. 349) and D. Seyfort Ruegg (1983), p. 232, note 75. See also below, KhJ
III translation, note 95.
20 Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma rigs...rnam bahad, p. 473.5:
gang yang phya pa'i riga pa ni//
bye brag, smra dangtis rten s://
grage pas rnam bcas 'gog byed cing//
sems tsam rnam med dbu ma i//
rige pas bkag nas ade bdun gzhung//
118 rten gyi ni grags pa dang//
mthun par 'chad ces gang zer ba//
de vis gzhung nas legs bshad nas//
kun la vid rton ned byas nas/
ma bahad nan gyis abyor bar zad//
See also ibid., p. 647.2, on the pramapaphala according to Phyva-pa and his
school.
21Ibid., p. 745:
chos kyi dbang phyug rigs pa'i seng geyis//



183
yid kyi mun sel zhes bya'i bstan bcos su
ndo sems lugs gayis bkag nas sde bdun gzhung//
118 rten grage sde spyod pa'i dbu mar bkral//
The first line is an expansion of Phyva-pa's personal name, Chos-kyi-seng-ge.
"Lho-pa, Dpal Idan sa, P. 486.5-6. Before this, at age 18 (1200) Sa-pan
is said by a few later sources to have received a little instruction of Pramaņa
from Zhu-ston Rdo-rje-skyabs.
"Shakya-nchog-ldan, Tshad ma'i mdo, P. 39. The chronology given in this
passage by Shakya-mchog-Idan is wrong (cf. above, chapter 1). Apparently he was
working from memory for he qualifies all his dates with the word tsan "about,
circa."
On the visit of Sakyasribhadra to Tibet see G. Tucci (1949), vol. 2, pp.
335-339. The most detailed extant biography of Sakyasri is Bsod-nams-dpal-bzang-
po, Sa'i steng na 'gran zla dang bral ba kha che pandita shakya shri bhadra'i ruan
thar. xylographic edition in 66 folios exists at the Bihar Research Society,
Patna (provisional catalogue no. 591). It seems to be the Gra-phyi Tahongs-dus-
grwa-tshang xylograph mentioned in Gangs can svi, . 212.1. Tucci may have
brought a copy of it to Rome.
For another account of Sakyasri's visit to Tibet, see 'Gos lo-tsa-ba Gzhon-
nu-dpal (G. Roerich transl. (1976), pp. 1063-1071). See also 1. Ferrari (1958),
P. 90, note 53, and A. Vostrikov (1970), p. 111, note 341. On Sakyasri's dates
see also Shakya-mchog-ldan, Kha che, pp. 556.2-557.6. The dates of Sakyasri are
also discussed by D. Seyfort Ruegs (1966), p. 42, note 1.
on the date of the PV retranslation, see chapter 5, note 59.
Sa-pap may actually have seen Säkyasri for the last time in late 1212 or
early 1213, for the latter reached Pu-rang in Mnga'-ris by the summer of 1213, and
spent the rainy-season retreat there.
"Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshogs, Rt som 'phro kha skong to Dkon-tichog-Thun-grub,
Dan pa'i chos, D. 316.4. Here Sa-pan is said to have composed the Rigs ster in
about his thirty-eighth year, i.e. c. 1219. L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 101,
states that Sa-pan "started work on [it] in 1219," taking betaame to mean
"started" instead of "composed." He refers, p. 303, note 293, also to Bkra-shis-



184
lhun-grub [actually it should be Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen), Dpal ldan sa, f.
11b.2-3.
28Shakya-mchog-Idah, Tshad ma'i mdo, p. 39.2: bod yn bahad pa'l Thad ma
zhugs par.
Ibid., p. 39.3. CF. van der Kuijp (1979), p. 409. For the text see also
ibid., p. 421, note 15.
on these terms see below, KhJ III translation, note 135.
"Shakya-mchog-Idan, Tshad ma rigs ... rnam bahad, p. 453.2-7: de ltar
bahad na phyoge glang arags pa'i zhabs kyi gzhung si 'sal zla'i gtso bo khas
blangs pa ayid du syur te ezhung lugs de dang de dag tu ni li srid phyi rol
gyi don khas len pa de srid du/ iig rten syi grage pa dang/ bye bras, tu sama
ba't 'dod pa bkag nas/ mdo sde pa'i phyogs gang yin pa de nyid rang lugs su bshad
pa'l phyir dang/ phyi rol don og pa'i tshe/ thog mer sems tsan ruam bcas kyi
luga la enas nas/ sal zhing tik pa'i rtage dang/ lhan cig dmise nges kyi rtage
kyis snang ba sems su bsgrubs pa'i phyir dang/ athar ni rnam rdzun pa'i luge gang
yin pa de nyid gzhir bzhag nas gzung 'dzin gnyis med te bsgrubs pa'i phyir dang/
shes bya thams cad rang stong dang/mthar bden grubkyf chos shig khas si len pa
dang/ stong ayid kyi ngos "dzin med dgas gi cha la 'chad pa ni
pa'i gzhung thoge, med sku mched kyi bkral ba'i shing rta'srol las mi. 'yung ba'
rayu mtshan gyis phyoge glang grags pa'i azhung luga dag tulang ma gsungs pali
phyir rol/
des na de dag sun 'byin pa ni bstan bcos di'l dngos kyi deos pa yin la/
This is a continuation of the passage quoted above in note 19. See also
101d., p. 587.4: phyoge snga mas/ sde bdun syi mthar thug Dro bo nyid med per
smra ba't lugs su bkral naa de der "chad pa rin syi/ rang lugama yin te rang
lugs la de'i dgonge pa rnan brdzun du gnas pas/.. . . See further ibid., P.
745:
jiga med dpa' bo sa skya'i rje btsun gyis/
mdo sems gru chen bzung nas sde bdun syi//
rgya mthor zhugs tshe byams pa'i chos Inga yi//
nges dos gsal adzad rigs pali gter gzhung wdzad//
32 RTRG, p. 168.3.6-168.4.1 (da 286.6-29a.1).



185
Ibid., p. 169.3.1 (da 30b.1): grub mtha'i rnam gzhag spyir dpvad na/:.
169.3.4: de la gzhan ayi brtags pa dgag na/; and p. 169.3.5 (30b.5): bde bar
gshers pa'1 lugs bsgrub pa.
Compare his list of non-Buddhist schools at the end of the Rige gter rang
'grel, p. 264.1.6 (da 1196.6):
thub pa ser skya rkang mig pa dang ug pa'i bu//
mkha! gos can dang tahu rol mdzes pa'i gzhung 'dzin pa//
Elsewhere Sa-paņ (and many others) followed a conventional fivefold division of
the non-Buddhist Indian schools. See KhJ III 43 and D. Jackson (1985), pp. 4f.
3RTRG. p. 169.3.1-3 (da 306.1): grub mthal nan gzhag spyir dpyad na/
ngo bo nyid dang dbang phyug dang//
rtso bordul dang rnan rig dang//
rten 'brel yin zhes grub pa'i mtha/
tha dad rang gzhan ade pa 'dod/
mustega byed ago bo nyid gyur smra ba ni/ thams cad ngo bo nyid las byung ba
dang/ dbang phyu, pa dbang phyug gis byas pa dang/ grangs can etso bos byas pa
dang/ zes zan dang nyan thos rdul phran syis byas pa dang/ custsan pasems
dang/ dbu ma pa'ang, don dam par spros pa dang bral thing kun rdzob tu dngos por
smraba de dag gi cjes su fug kyang rung/ *iig rten grags ade dang batun yang
rung ste de dag gang Itar yang kun tu tha snyad pa la don dang shes pa gyis su
kha tshon chod do/l.
For an expansion and explanation of this passage, see Glo-bomkhan-chen,
Sde bdun mdo...rnam bahad, pp. 31.4ff (16a, 4ff).
Regarding the twofold division of the Madhyamaka according to their ap-
proach to the relative, surface level of truth, Sa-paņ elsewhere adopted a dif-
ferent principle of classification. See his Bkal gdans do korba' xhus lan, P.
403.3.2. On this see also D. Jackson (1985a), p. 27.
JORTRG, p. 169.3.5 (da 305.5): dgonga pa ngos bzung ba ni/thub pas phyi
rol dpyod pa na rdul phran zhal gyis bzhes la tha snyad kyi de kho na nyid dpyod
pa na sems tsan zhal gyis bzhes shing/ don dam pa'i de kho na nyid la jug pana
spros padang bral ba la ug par mdzad dol/.
Ibid., p. 170.1.4 (da 310.4): phyl rol svi don khas len pa na
pa'i lugs azung bar bya'o//.
mdo ade
38cb1d., p. 170.3.1 (da 325.1)



186
39Ibid., p. 170.3.2 (da 32b.2).
4° Ibid., p. 170.3.5 (da 32b.5):
kun rdzob jig rten grags pa la//
brten na tahad ma'i rnam shag sal//
**Ibid., p. 170.4.2 (da 33a.2): kun tu tha snyad pa'i tahad madpyod pa na
mdo mdund pe dang thas 'grel mdzad pa'Efes su 'brang nro/.
"Ibid., p. 171.3.1 (da 346.1). But cf. the Thus, p. 31.3.4 (62a.4), where
Sa-pap is maintaining the Madhyamaka position: anyia med kyl, shes pa athar dngos
po la thug pa'i phyir don das par si rung Dro.
43RTRG, P. 172.1.4 (da 35.4).
**Ibid., p. 230.1.5 (da 1515.5): de ltar grub mtha' bzhi las slob doon ni
phyl rol gyi don khas len pa na mdo sde pa ltar mdzad la shes bya nang la fue
pa na rnan med zhal syis bzhes so//. See also Go-rams-pa, Sde bdun mdo, p. 555.5.
"See Go-rama-pa, Tshad ma riga, p. 67.2 (34a): tha snyad kyi de kho na
nyid la fug pali tshe sems tsam zhal gyis bzhes la 'di la rnam bden rdzun gyis
yod dol don dam pa'1 de kho na nyid la jus pa'i tshe chos thams cad spros
dang bral ba la 'jus par adzad de/ 'di ni dbu ma'e gang dag riga gter rang 'srel
svi sa khonga, 'di la brten nas/ rigs gter gyi. Luge la rnam Igrel gyi mthar thug
i dgongs, pa dbu mar, skyel ba yin no zhes smra ba ni rang nyid blo eros rtsing bar
mtshon pa'i rgyal mtshan "dzuge pa ste gong du phyi nang si grub mthal duma
bahad pa't nang nas skabs 'dir sangs rgyas pa'i grub atha' la bahi yod par bstan/
bzhi po de'i nang nas kyang rnam srel 'dir mdo sens gnyia ky grub mthal stan la
dbab pa sa bcad 'og m dang sbyor tryu yin pas 'di 'dra'i 'khrul pe skye ba'i don
med pa'i phyir ro.
See also Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas (Derge ed.), p. 278.5.
*Kong-sprul Blo-gros-atha'-yas, Theg pa'i sgopart 1, p. 563.2. (Cf.
above, note 4.) This was cited by both L. Zwilling (1981), p. 313, note 20, and
L. van der Kuijp (1983), p. 107. The latter seems to disagree with Kong-sprul
since on p. 310, note 328, he states that the final position of Sa-akya Pandita
is ... Cittamatra." But L. Zwilling, p. 309, apparently accepts Kong-sprul's
assertion and tries to understand Sa-paņ translation of PV III 3 in light of it.
Though Zwilling's article raises some interesting points, its main arguments are



187
vitiated by the fact that the verse quoted in the RTRG, P. 197.4.4 (da 87a.4).
which he takes to be second translation by Sa-pan of PV III 3, 1s actually Pin
II 56. (The same first pada also occurs as PV I 166a.) The fu11 PVin verse II 56
as quoted in the RTRG is:
don byed nus pa gang vin pa
de 'dir don dan yod pa yin//
de la rim dang rim ma yin//
'gal phyir skad cig min pa med /
It may also be worth noting in this connection that the later authoritative
exponent of the Sa-skya-pa tradition, Go-rams-pa, interpreted PV III 3 as the
definitive Soutrantika statement on the two truths. See Go-ram-pa. Sde bdun mdo,
P. 391.3.
L. Zwilling (1981), pp. 310€, speaks of the Rigs gter as having been
composed prior to Sa-pan's retranslation of the Py. However, as described above
(chapter 5, note 59), the translation work was done sometime between 1208 and
1213. On the other hand, the Rige ster was composed at Sa-akya sometime after his
full ordination (1208), according to tradition when he was about thirty-seven
years of age (c. 1219). It is also best not to draw any conclusions from the
Gzhung lugs legs par bshad pa about Sa-pan's thought, for it is a forgery. See D.
Jackson (1985); cf. L. van der Kuijp (1983), pp. 103 and 304, note 295, and (1985)
passim.
*KAJNSH, P. 2878.1: bdag nyid chen po 'di'i bzhed pa la chos kyl stars
pas ram 'grel du bshad pa'1 dgongs pa mthar thug pa ni/ phage pa klu skrub kyl.
lugs dang mthun pa'i dbu ma kho nar bzhed cing/.
But in his Rigs gter rnam bahad (Sde bdun mdo...rnam bahad). P. 36.2
(186.2), Glo-bo mkhan-chen explicitly denies this interpretation of Pranana in the
Rige ster. See also ibid., p. 47.18 (24a.1), where Indian interpretations of
Dharmakirti as a Madhyamika are discussed but not accepted as Sa-pan's system.
See also Glo-bo mkhan-chen's succinct summary in his Sde bdun mdo...nye bar mkho,
p. 61.4-62.3 (2.4-26.3):
lha dbang Ejes su 'brang ba'i slob dpon dag//
mu steg taod tshe phyl rol khas len cing/
rang luge mthar thug rnam bed tshad mar smra//
Egyan gyi rjes 'brang riga par smra ba kun//
tha snyad dprod tshe 11 ltar byed kyang rung/
mthar thug kun rdzob dri mas dben pa yi//
don dam dbu ma'i lam chen der lug go//
lugs srol de Itar yin yang sa skya pa'i//



188
bzhed gzhung 'di ni dpal ldan eraga pa x1//
dgooga don gnas skabs gayis la lega sbyar nas
rnam rig dbu ma bde blag rtogs pa 1/1
thabs su sal bar bæhed cea 'chad do//
For the verse of Rngog, see above, note 9.
"KAJ III 48, autocommentary (D p. 107.4.3): des na kun tu tha dad (read:
snyad] alt geht rnam rig bagrub nas/ tha snyad las "das pa bsgrub pa'i phyir.
CE, KhJ I 34 (p. 84.3.4 (170a.4]) and DS, p. 315.1.2:
tha snyad dpyod pa'i rigs pa la//
dgonge nas chos rnams sems su gsungs//
dam pa'i don la dgonge nas ni//
chos kun spros pa bral zhes gaunga//
The same verse from the PV is quoted in the RTRG, p. 172.1.3 (da 356.3).
KhJ III 48, autocommentary (D p. 108.1.1): des na rnam ris lore par rtoga
na dbu ma'1 de kho na nyid phyin ci ma log par khong du chud par gyur ro z hes
roan 'grel mdzad pa'i dgonge pa de vin no//.
52 RTRG, PP. 170.4.2 (da 33a.2), 172.1.2 (355.2); Go-rans-pa, Sde bdun ndo,
P. 551.3, discusses tha snyad (vyavahāra) in this context.
53KTRG, P. 169.3.5 (da 30b.5).
54Ibid., p. 171.2.4 (da 340.4).
"Ibid., pp. 172.1.2 (da 35b.2) and 211.4.6 (da 115a.6). Cf. his Thus, p.
31.3.1 (tha 32a.1), where he specifies that there he is concerned with the ulti-
mate truth of the Madhyamaka and not with the causal efficiency of Pramana.
See above, notes 49 and 51, which mention the goal as being the ultimate
reality of the Madhyamaka (dbu ma'i de kho na nyid) that is beyond transactional
usage (tha snyad las 'das pa).
57RTRG, P. 169.3.5 (da 305.5): thub pas ... don dan pa'i dekho na nyid
ug pa na spros padang bral ba la ug par ndzad do//.
la



189
58This was also Glo-bo mkhan-chen's understanding in his Sde bdun mdo... nye
bar akho, p. 62.1-2 (26.1-2), where he states that Sa-pap's method vas to apply
Dharmakirti's intended sense to the two contexts of Sautrantika and Yogacara,
while maintaining that vijñapti was a means for easily understanding Madhyamaka.
lugs srol de Itar yin yang sa skya pa'i//
bzhed gzhung 'di ni dpal ldan grags pa vi//
dgonga don gnas skabs gnyis la lega sbyar nas
Tham i dbu na bde bla, rtogs pa 17
thabs su gsal bar bzhed ces 'chad do//
Sa-pan without a doubt interpreted the Pramana scriptures as belonging to
the Buddhist teachings, i.e. as revealing the path to liberation. One of the
things he took pains to show in his Rigs gter rang'grel was that Dharmakirti
followed both the Sauträntika and Yogācāra, and that in so doing Dharmakirti
followed the teachings of the Buddha himself (RTRG, pp. 169.3.5€ (-da 300.5]).
Thus I cannot see the justification for saying that Sa-pan "maintained that logic
is an utterly profane science, containing nothing Buddhistic at all, just as
medicine and mathematics are," which is what Th. Stcherbatsky (1930-32), vol. 1,
P. 46, averred. Even if Sa-paņ thought that Dharmakirti vas ultimately a Madhya-
mika, that is all the more reason to think that he believed Pramāņa to have
soteriological content. Pramāṇa would thus be a means for drawing the student
ultimately to the liberating view of the Madhyamaka. But Sa-pap (in agreement
with the usual Indian Buddhist classification) Indeed did maintain that Praniņa
vas one of the five main fields of knowledge (rig gnas chen po), and within that
context he classified it as separate from doctrinal studies (nang don rispa).
See Ngag-dang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas (D), p. 210.4.
The laying of great emphasis on the religious content of Buddhist Pramana
is said to go back in the Tibetan tradition at least to Tsong-kha-pa. See ibid.,
p. 216.3. On the religious status of Pramāņa cf. also D. Seyfort Ruegg (1966), p.
37, note 1.
"Shakya-nchog-ldan, Rje btsun sa, pp. 93. Cf. L. van der Kuijp (1983),
p. 97. Yet Shakya-achog-ldan, Tshad ma'i ndo, p. 6.5, Identifies the ultimate
philosophical tenet of this tradition (lugs 'di'i grub mtha mthar thug) as the
Madhyamaka. This, however, is the "Madhyamala" of the Dharmas of Maitreya as
Interpreted by Asahga. Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas (D), p. 275.3, takes
strong exception to this interpretation.
D'Go-rans-pa, Sde bdun ndo, p. 556.4: rigs gter sy dgonge pa 'di las szhan
du 'chad en rhana kyis ni/ riga ster rtsa 'grel gang na yod aton dros 30//.



一
一一一一
-
-
-
|
|
=
=
'
下一
7
一
11
-
1
一
。
上一
一生一
一个人
了一下
,



Chapter 8
THE STRUCTURE AND CONTENTS OF THE MKHAS JUG
The main subject of the Mkhas jug is the methodology of Indian Buddhist
scholarship, and in particular, the methods and principles of the three main
activities of the traditional scholar: composition, teaching, and debating. Sa-
pa devotes one main section of the treatise to each of these. When introducing
and concluding the treatise, however, he followed established Indian custom and
added brief preliminary and concluding sections. Thus the general outline of the
work is as follows:
I. Preliminaries (3 ff.)
II. Main Contents (57 ff.)
A. Composition (25 ff.)
1. Preliminary sections of a treatise (2 Ef.)
2. Grammar (6 ff.)
3. Poetics (17 ff.)
B. Exposition (14 ff.)
C. Debating (18 ff.)
III. Concluding matter (1 f.)
The preliminaries include verses of homage or worshipful Invocation (mchod
brfod) and of the author's resolution to expound his subject 'chad par dam bca!
be). In the subsequent introductory verses he also identifies his motive, his own
identity and capabilities, and his subject matter. The concluding matter of the
treatise consists of some final verses of explanation, exhortation and dedication,
and also a final colophon.
Sa-pan composed the work following a format that was well established in
India: versified basic text with a prose autocommentary. The basic contents of
the work were presented first of all in concise verses which were suitable for
memorization. Then, inmediately following each verse or group of verses, he
expanded and explained the meaning through a prose comment. Usually the comment
was just a restatement of the same point in a fors that had been made grammatical-
ly and semantically more complete through the addition of grammatical particles
and explanatory words or phrases that were missing in the basic mnemonic verse.
Sometimes, too, the basic verse served merely as the point of departure for an
elaborate excursus. Two additional commentarial devices that Sa-pap employs are



192
the "intermediate verse" (bar skabs kyi tshigs bcad) and the "summarizing verse"
(badus pa'i tshiga bcad). The former usually occur as a verse or group of verses
that expand on the subject just preceding, but which do not complete the discus-
sion. The latter are verses which concisely summarize and conclude the foregoing
discussion.
It is not known whether Sa-pan composed both basic verses and commentary at
the same time, or whether he composed first the one and then the other. Nor do
there survive any copies of the versified basic text apart from and independent of
the prose autocommentary (as one finds in the case of the Riga gter). It is also
not clear whether Sa-pan would have included the intermediate and summarizing
verses with the basic verses or as an addition to the prose commentary."
When arguing a point in other works such as the Rigs gter. Sa-pan often
follows a three-step presentation, and in the KhJ he employs it once, in part III:
(1) The refutation of the tradition of others (zhan nyt luradgag pa
(2) The statement of one's own opinion (rang x1 'dod pa br fod pa
(3) The rejection of controversy (or objections) regarding the latter (de la
rtsod po spong ba
Such a manner of presentation belongs to the expository method called "objection
and reply" (bral lan). Sa-pan recommends this very method in the Khu itself (II
33) as the proper method for analyzing apparent mixtures of doctrine and for
resolving apparent doctrinal contradictions. He holds that through this method
one can use scripture and reasoning to settle very thorny questions, but that
without it one will not be able to discern what is correct from incorrect.
The Content of the Mikhas
jus
of the three main topics of the Kh]--composition, exposition, and debate-
Sa-pan devotes somewhat more space to the first, mainly because this section
contains a long translated passage from an Indian work on poetics. In general,
Sa-pan seems to have treated each of the three topics as of equal weight and thus
accorded a major section to each.
The particular order in which he presented the three topics appears to have
been dictated by the subjects themselves. He did not follow the stereotyped order
by which this triad is now most commonly referred to: "exposition, debate, and
composition" ('chad rtsod rt som sum), nor in the order by which Sa-pan himself
refers to them elsewhere: "exposition, composition, and debate."7 Exposition here



193
in the KhJ could not come first because it presupposed a knowledge of grammar.
Thus composition had best precede exposition. Moreover, Sa-pan thought it most
appropriate to begin the main contents of his own treatise by explaining one
aspect of compositional practice, the preliminary parts of treatises in general.
The section on composition also deserved a primary position from another
point of view. For Sa-pan's contemporaries it was this section that contained the
most new and unprecedented material. Sa-pan's disciple Lho-pa kun-mkhyen Rin-
chen-dpal, for instance, considered the Khu to be the greatest and most diffi-
cult) of Sa-pan's three "grammatical treatises" (agra'i batan bcos). In putting
the most emphasis on the work's grammatical content he seems to be following Sa-
pan, who in his own Nga brgyad sa'i 'grel pa described the KhJ as a "treatise on
grammar which teaches] merely as much as is required for Tibet" (egra' bstan
bcos bod le nye bar mkho ba tsam zhig). But since there is so much else taught
in the KhJ, 1t is not surprising that other Tibetan scholars sometimes classified
the work otherwise. Kong-sprul, for example, referred to the KhJ as a treatise on
poetics, one of Sa-pan's "three treatises [on Sanskrit literary arts) in which he
summarized the sense of an Indian basic work" (rgya szhung gi don bsdus pa'i batan
bcos rhan passun)." Shakya-mchog-ldan emphasized still a different aspect of
the work, classifying it as one of Sa-pan's "treatises which refute those who
bstan bcos), i.e. as a polemical treatise." Yet probably the most fitting de-
scription of all is given by the writer of a biography of Sa-pan found in a
history of the teachers of the Lam "bras lineage. He called this work "the Khu,
which is [a treatise) required for the basic texts in general" (szhung luge spyi
la mkho ba mkhas 'jug).12
Composition
Sa-pan's treatment of composition, the first topic, had three main parts:
(1) the explanation of the preliminary sections found at the beginning of trea-
tises, (2) language (including grammar) and semantics, and (3) poetica. The
first of these explains very briefly how one should begin a treatise (I7-12).
The second two deal with some aspects of language and literary studies that are
required for the sophisticated composition of treatises. Sa-pan begins his ac-
count of language and semantics by explaining the basic units of language on the
phonological ise, "morphological" (ming), and "grammatical" (tshis) levels of
analysis (I 13-14). Then he explains some basic concepts of semantics. He dis-
tinguishes for instance the original arbitrary designations (brda) of natural



194
language from later, deliberately established terminology (the snyad) (I 17-18).
The latter can be divided into either ironical designations or designations that
accord in sense with the original arbitrary designations (I 23-26). He also
describes echoic and onomatopoeic words (I 27-29).
Sa-pap next (1 30) classifies words (especially nouns) into class-words
(common nouns) and name-words (proper nouns), attributing this distinction to
Dignaga (based on the latter's PS I 3c, commentary). He also enters into epistemo-
logical and logical considerations, briefly treating the relation of object, word
and thought, and both assertive and negative statements (1 31-37). He ends this
section with some explanations of more properly grammatical topics: cases and case
endings (I 38-39), gender (I 40), the sindhi of case endings (I 43), exceptional
uses of grammatical particles (I 45-46), verb formation (I 50), and the definition
of a sentence (I 51).
The third and last part of the main section on composition introduces
certain aspects of Indian poetics. He begins by defining and illustrating the
nine aesthetic emotions (rasa), and explaining their proper combinations (153-
81). He also gives some examples of good and faulty imagery, drawn for instance
from Bhoja's Sarasvatikanthabharaps (I 82-86). Next he explains a basic typology
of literature and principles of prosody (1 87-90). He then embarks on his presen-
tation of materials from Dandin's Kavyadarsa, including the classification of
verse types (1 92-95) and the distinction of the Vaidarbha and Gauda poetie
dictions (1 99-108). Finally he begins his treatment of the poetical figures of
meaning (don Egyan arthālapkāra), which form the longest part of the section on
composition. He translated most of the beginning of Kävyādar sa chapter 2, this
being the first ever rendering of a part of this work into Tibetan (1 110). His
translation includes descriptions of the following nine figures, together with the
examples of the many subtypes of the first eight:
(1) factual expression (svabhāvokti)
(2) simile (upama
(3) metaphor (rupaka)
(4) zeugnsa (dipaka)
(5) recurrence (avrtti)
(6) objection (āksepa
(7) adducing another matter (arthantaranyāsa)
(8) distinction (vyatireka)
(9) possibility (vibhavana



195
Exposition
Sa-pan's presentation of the second main section of the Khu, that on the
principles and techniques of scriptural exposition, can be divided into two parts:
(1) a general introduction and (2) a detailed explanation of actual practice.
The first consists of a description of the three most important factors involved
in any act of exposition: the teacher, the student, and the doctrine or text which
is taught (II 1-3). The second main part, the explanation of the actual practice
of exposition, sets forth five main topics taught by Vasubandhu in his
Vyākyāyukti:
(1) statement of purpose
(2) summarization
(3) explanation of the sense of the words
(4) explanation of the connections between words and topics
(5) explanation by way of objections and replies
The first of these Sa-pan had already touched on in his discussion of the
preliminary parts of treatises (I 12). This topic in any case seems to have been
already commonly understood by the Tibetans of his time. Therefore he quickly
passed on to (2) summaries, of which he discerned two main types: (a) concise
summaries of the general topic, and (b) more detailed topical outlines (II 4-5).
He explained the desired traits and possible defects of each.
Next, when explaining (3) how to expound the sense of the words, he like-
wise distinguished two methods: (a) the explaining of compound words, and (b) the
method of commenting word-by-word. The first mainly applies to Sanskrit, so he
did not develop it in much detail (II 6-7). The second method too cannot be
applied in full to Tibetan, but Sa-pan extracts and adapts some of the most
pertinent features, such as basic grammatical parsing, and grammatical analysis
through questions and answers (II 8-9). He gives some examples of how to expound
a passage and also discusses the classes of terms that require explanation.
Words in ordinary usage can be explained in three ways: (1) directly, (11) through
etymology, and (111) through rearranging or altering the component elements of a
word (II 10). He gives examples of each. In this connection he also takes up
several grammatical topics, such as the interpretation of "intensive" relative
pronouns ("whatever," "Whoever," etc.) and their correlatives (II 12), and words
in the vocative case (II 13). He goes on to describe the virtues of correct
religious teaching, and the possible faults of teacher, student, and teaching
method (II 14-20). He concludes his discussion of word-by-word exposition by



treating some of the problems that beset Tibetan teachers (Il 22-26). These
include the exposition of translations that are difficult to understand because of
archaic vocabulary, differences of dialect, varying understandings of the etymolo-
8y of the original Sanskrit by different translators, mistakes of translation,
etc. He also explains other potentially difficult features often found in Tibetan
translations, such as the addition of clarifying words (II 27), translation
through a repetitive phrase (II 28-29), and common maxims (II 30).
The fourth main topic was the method of explanation by linking together
previous and subsequent words and topics. He explains how to do this whether the
linking topics or concepts are explicitly mentioned in the basic text or not (II
31-32). Then he treated the fifth main topic, the method of commenting on a
thorny doctrinal question by means of objections and replies, i.e. through a
presentation that mirrors the exchange of views of participants in a discussion
(II 33).
After concluding the account of Vasubandhu's five methods, he very briefly
introduces the method of explaining scriptures through the six hermeneutical
categories called the "six limits" (mtha' drug), viz. (1) special intent or (2) no
special intent, (3) interpretable meaning or (4) definitive meaning, and (5)
11teral expression or (6) non-literal expression (II 34). (Sa-paņ also mentions
these six "limits" in his commentary on KhJ III 23.)
Debating
The third main section, which is translated in full below, explains the
methods of debate and some of the presuppositions upon which such formal philo-
sophical discussions are founded. At first sight this would appear to be a
practical guide to debating, for the exposition is arranged according to the three
main steps of an actual debate: (1) preparation, (2) the debate itself, and (3)
conclusion. In fact, Sa-pan does not explain directly or systematically the basic
procedures of debate. Rather, he mainly treats various philosophical and textual
issues that are related to debating, going into just some of the more difficult or
controversial points of debating practice. Only near the end does he begin to set
forth connectedly some of the actual steps of debating, and even there he often
dvells on what must be considered technicalities. The explanation for such an
approach is that debating was in Sa-pan's time already established as a standard
part of Tibetan scholasticism. Thus Sa-pan's treating of particular theoretical
or technical points should be understood as attempts to correct or augment speci-
fic aspects of current debating practice. The basic steps of debating were



197
apparently so well known that he considered them not to require a detailed sepa-
rate exposition.
The Steps of a Debate. Most modern readers are unlikely to have any fant-
liarity with the basic debating practices of Indo-Tibetan scholasticism, and
therefore a brief sketch of a somewhat later Sa-skya-pa system of debate will help
make the context of many of the discussions clearer. The following is drawn from
Shakya-mchog-Idan's Tshad ma rigs gter dsongs rayan, his detailed amplification
and interpretation of the Rigs gter which in these passages takes into account
some of Sa-pap's explanations in the Khy, but does not accord with it exactly."
The two main participants in any debate are (1) the proponent (sarar rrol:
purvavadin) and (2) the respondent (phyir rol: prativădin). The first asserts a
thesis and proves it with a probans. The second disagrees with the proponent's
argument and believes that either the thesis or its probans is faulty. His main
job is therefore to refute one or the other by demonstrating its faults. In
addition to the above two participants, there must also be a witness or arbiter
(dpang po: sāksin), whose duty it is to judge the debate impartially,
The debate begins with the respondent questioning the proponent to elicit
his thesis. The proponent replies by stating his thesis. If the thesis is taken
to be fundamentally erroneous, then the respondent may straightaway refute it.
But if it is accepted as correct, then the respondent Inquires about the reason
which proves that thesis. The proponent replies by stating the probans. The
respondent then asks whether the probans possesses all three logical relations of
a sound inference (tshul sum: trairūpya). In reply the proponent "removes the
thorns" (tsher. ma byin: kaptakoddhāra), 1.e. he negates the three possible faulty
relations between the probans and the subject and predicate of the thesis. This
concludes the first phase of the debate. The three questions of the respondent
are subsumed under the single function "inquiring about the proponent's] opinion"
('dod pa driba), and the corresponding anawers of the proponent are his "setting
forth the initial position" (phyoga ang malog pa.
Now, 16 the respondent agrees that the thesis and probans are sound, he
must admit his concurrence. If, on the other hand, he believes that the probans
is faulty, he enters into the second main phase of the debate, which for him
consists of the statement of refutation (aun 'byin brfod pa). As mentioned above,
the respondent may also immediately enter into his refutation if he believes that
the thesis itself is unsound. In that case he need not wait to hear the probans.
The respondent phrases his refutations in the form of logical consequences (thal
Ryur: prasanga) which reveal the faults or inconsistencies entailed by the propo
nent's reasoning.



198
After the respondent has concluded his criticism, the proponent begins his
second main task, which is the giving of a rejoinder (lan 'debs pa). This he may
do only if he believes that the refutation given by the respondent was fallacious,
for his rejoinder is simply the identification of the fallacy of the refutation.
If the undesired logical consequences stated by the respondent are sound, then the
proponent instead of giving a rejoinder must ask the respondent to state the
formal proof of the refutation in its positive form (i.e. not as a mere logical
consequence, but as an independent, formally stated inference). This the respon-
dent must then do.
These steps of debating can be shown schematically as follows:
Figure 2.
The Steps of a Debate
• Proponent
O Respondent
Query about thesis dan bca' 'dri ba)
Advancing a fallacious
thesis (dam bca' ltar
snang for pa
Advancing a sound thesis
(dam bca' yang dag 19g pa)
O Refutation of fallacious
thesis (dam bca' ltar
snang la sun 'byin
brfod pa)
O Query about the probans of
the sound thesis (dam bca!
yang dag si sgrub byed
"dri ba
Presentation of a fal-
lacious probans (sgrub
byed Itar snang 'god pa
Presentation of a sound
probans (sgrub byed yang
dag 'god pa)
Query about the three in-
ferential relations of
that probans (sgrub byed
de'l tshul sum gyi
sgrub byed 'dri ba
Query about the three
inferential relations be-
longing to that probans
grub byed de'i tshul gsum
syi sgrub byed 'dri ba



Incorrect "thorn removal"
Correct "thorn removal"
(tsher ma "byin pa) i.e.
negation of possible faults
O Refutation of falla-
cious probans (in the
form of logical conse-
quence) (sgrub byed
ltar snang la sun
byin brjod pa
Query about the probans
which is complete with
regard to the three re-
lations ('khor gsum
of a sound refutation
(sun 'byin yang dag i
'khor gsum tshang ba'i
sgrub byed 'dri ba)
O Statement of such a probans
O Concurrence that the
probans is sound
(sgrub byed yang dag gi
I jes su 'ero ba'i ngag
O Statement of fallacious re-
futation (sun 'byin ltar
snang br jod pa
Rejoinder to the fallacious
refutation (identifying the
fallacy) (sun 'byin ltar
snang la lan debs pa)
One thing that must be kept in mind when reading Sa-pan's account is that
for him real debate is a formal confrontation between two scholars who maintain
and attempt to defend different tenets. He was not talking about the classroom
debates of students by which they tested each other's knowledge. Such practice
debates, however, could be useful to prepare one for real debating.



200
When explaining debating, moreover, Sa-pan aimed at presenting the tradi-
tion of Dharmakirti, especially as it is set forth in the latter's Vādanyaya. He
quotes that treatise some ten times, and refers to it and to Dharmakirti several
times besides. The opinions that he rejected belonged for the most part either to
the Naiyāyikas of India or the earlier dialecticians of Tibet. Most of the
Tibetan pürvapakpas derive in particular from the teachings of the great Phywa-pa
Chos-kyi-seng-ge and his successors in the early Bedus pa tradition.
A Subject Outline of KhJ Section III. The following outline will give a
quick overview of the contents of section III. For the corresponding (though
sometimes not identical) subject headings given by Glo-bo mkhan-chen in his
Kh.JNSh, see below, Appendix I.
I. Preparation: The determination of the three participants (III 1)
A. Refutation of the opinions of others
1. Erroneous opinions of early Tibetans
a. Sixteen occasions of defeat (III 2)
b. A witness is not necessary (III 3)
2. The Naiyāyika system of Akşapāda
a. Twenty-two defeats (III 4-7)
b. Twenty-four futile rejoinders (III 8-10)
B. Establishing Sa-pan's own system
1. The defeats number four, coming from the basic two (III 11)
2. Proper motivation and goal of debate (III 12)
3. Correct conduct in debate (III 13)
C. Elimination of further discussion: refutation of the legitimacy of de-
ceitful means (III 14)
II. The actual debate itself
A. The debating of neophytes
B. The debating of scholars
1. Debate in which both opponents maintain tenets: the practice of great
scholars (III 15)
2. The special case of a respondent who refutes the opponent's thesis with-
out maintaining his own (III 16)
3. Detailed discussion of debate between opponents who each maintain tenets
a. Basic subject of debate: one only maintains the immediately relevant
tenets, not every tenet of one's school (III 17-18)
b. Engaging in debate on that topic



201
i. Basic similarity of debating through reasoning and scriptures (III
19)
ii. Differences
(A) Debating though scripture
(1) The scope of scriptures in debate: objects of the third kind
(III 20)
(2) Contradictions of scripture
(a) Contradictions between Buddhist and non-Buddhist
(b) Internal contradictions of non-Buddhist scriptures
(c) Apparent contradictions between Buddhist schools
(1) Between Srāvaka and Mahāyāna (III 21)
(11) Principles of interpretation which resolve apparent
contradictions (III 22)
(iii) Those who do not understand these principles imagine
contradictions (III 23)
(iv) Summary verses: examples of application of inter-
pretive principles (III 24-26)
(3) Questions and answers when debating on scriptures
(a) Such questions are permissable (III 27)
(b) Answers: The Buddha's four ways of answering (III 28)
(c) Such answers are acceptable in debate, though difficult
for the ignorant to understand (III 29)
(d) Two kinds of answers when debating on scriptures: pure
scripture and reasoning based on scripture (III 30)
(1) Restricted definition of "scripture" (I11 31-32)
(11) Examples of apparent contradictions of scripture
(111) Apparent contradictions of theory
(iv) Resolving apparent contradictions
(v) Summary (III 33)
(B) Debating through reasoning: One should determine whether
opponents are following tenets or not (III 34)
(1) Persons who claim not to follow tenets
(a) Most can be seen actually to follow tenets, under
examination (III 35)
(b) Those who do not out of ignorance (III 36)
(c) Those who do not out of fear of the logical con-
sequence
(d) Learned persons' nonaffirmation (III 37)
A. Through deceit



202
B. Truthful non-affirmation
(e) Summary (III 38–39)
(2) Maintaining a mixture of tenets (III 40)
(3) Systems of tenets maintained by the learned: Buddhist and
non-Buddhist Indian sectarians
(a) Some other tenets held by Tibetans (III 41-42)
(b) Schools of the non-Buddhist Indian sectarians
(1) Classification into five (III 43)
(ii) Further criteria of classification (III 44)
(111) Need to avoid classifications made by Tibetans (III
45)
(c) Buddhist tenets (III 46)
(d) Principles of Buddhist and non-Buddhist debate
(i) Determining the basic subject (III 47-48)
(ii) Objective grounding
A. When investigating external objects, Sautrāntika
reasoning has objective grounding (III 49)
B. Impossibility of there being followers of the Mind-
Only who assert external objects (III 50)
C. When external objects are negated, Mind-Only rea-
soning has objective grounding (III 51)
D. When ultimate reality is being determined, Madhyama-
ka has objective grounding (III 51 cont.)
E. Objection that there is no objective grounding if
one affirms tenets (III 52)
(4) Classification of dialectics
(a) Twofold classification (III 53)
(i) non-Buddhist Indian sectarians
(11) Buddhist
A. Differences between earlier and later Buddhist
dialecticians, and features of their debating
1. Early (III 54)
2. Later (III 55)
3. Specific procedures of debating: "removing the
thorns" (III 56-59)
B. Explanation of debate for beginners (III 60)
1. Questioning and answering (III 61)
2. Only one logical mark to be stated (III 62)
3. Counter-questioning the respondent when he says



203
the subject is not established (111 63)
4. The Mädhyamika's reasoning through Sunyati makes
the replies of others unestablished (III 64)
5. Answers to rejoinders phrased as necessary
consequences
a. The practice of others (III 65-67)
b. Sa-pan's system (III 68)
C. The benefits of debating (III 69)
III. The conclusion
A. The witness should summarize and express the argutients (III 70)
B. If the assembly is ignorant or dishonest: record the arguments and show them
to an upright judge elsewhere (III 71)
C. Concluding prayer (III 72)



204
NOTES
These preliminaries are explained immediately afterward, in the first part
of the section on composition. See KhJ (D) p. 82.1.6 (tha 165a.6 - 30.6).
"For a traditional classification of commentarial types, see Dung-dkar Blo-
bzang-'phrin-las, p. 378, note 346, where the following three are distinguished:
(1) tshig 'grel
(2) don 'grel
(3) mchan 'grel
See also A. Vostrikov (1935/37). pp. 72ff, where three main types are described:
(1) rnam bshad
(a) tshig 'grel
(b) don 'grel
(2) mchan
(3) mthal dprod
On these types of verses see K. Mimaki (1980) and below. KhJ III
translation, note 60. Elsewhere in the KhJ (section I, poetics) one finds a few
explanatory annotations (mchan bu), though it is not certain that Sa-pap put them
there. See (D) p. 93.3.6f (tha 1889.6 = 26.6).
*Such verses were included in the independent edition of the basic verses
of the Rigs gter.
PE. Oberwiller (1932), p. 3; (1934), p. 222. Cf. the different Indian
methods described by G. S. Huparikar (1949), p. 166. cf. also the quaestio dis-
putata form in Medieval European scholastic philosophy, described by R. Allers in
D. D. Runes ed. (1981), p. 261, and A. Piltz (1981), pp. 87, 148.
XhJ (D), p. 101.2.2-5 (tha 2030.2 = 416.2).
'For an explanation of the three activities of the scholar in what is
nowadays their typical order, see Dung-dkar Blo-bzang-'phrin-las, P. 382. He
explains that this order proceeds from easiest to most difficult. For the order
used by Sa-paņ, see for instance the colophon of his legs bshad (D), p. 61.2.6
(tha 122,6 - 23.6), and the colophon of his Sdeb sbyor, p. 141.3.6 (tha 2850.6
- 33a.6).



205
Olho-pa, ka, p. 556.5.
Nga brgyad ma'i, p. 148.4.4 (tha 300a.4).
"Ukong-sprul, Theg pa'i, p. 596. The other two such treatises were his
Tshig eister and Sdeb abyor sna tshoga ne tog si chun po. cf. Shakya-mchog-ldan,
Mkhas pa, p. 95.2.
11 Shākya-mchog-Idan, Chos kyi 'khor, p. 466.7.
Lam 'bras bla ma tahad ma'i lo rgyus, Encyclopedia Tibetica, vol. 106, p.
553.3. This goes back to the Lam 'bras khog phub by Bla-na-dan-pa Beod-name-
rgyal-mtshan.
**For the detailed subject headings of section I as given in Glo-bo mkhan-
chen's KhJNSh, see below, Appendix I.
14 For the subject headings of section II as given in the KhJNSh, see below,
Appendix I.
15 kJ (D), p. 95.1.6 (tha 191a =29a): de thams cad la grags pas re zhig
bzhag go. See also above, Introduction, note 6.
Shakya-mchog-ldan, Tshad ma rigs ... dgonge egyen, vol. 9, pp. 302-305,
339-342. It is a curious fact that in this system described by Shakya-mchog-idan,
the formal argument is stated by means of a thesis and reason, and not by the two
steps prescribed by Dharmakirti and enumerated in the KhJ, III 55 autoconuentary.
Dharmakirti held the statement of a thesis to be superfluous. On the controversy
that grew out of Shakya-mchog-Idan's interpretations of the argument forms, see
below, KhJ III translation, note 190.
17See below, KhJ III translation, note 194.
The 'khor gsum according to modern bsdus ra tradition are:
(1) rtags grub
(2) khyab pa grub
(3) dam bca' la bsal ba
A correct prasanga refutation must show the opponent that he is in contradiction
with the 'khor gsum. See 'Jam-dpal-"phrin-las, p. 165.4: 'khor gsum dngos sal



206
blo't yul du goal bar ston po'i ched du thal'syur 'phanga la de'i tshe thal
syur yang dag vin. Cf. the classification of rejoinders to thal Sayur replies,
KLJ III 65-66, 68, and KhJ III translation, note 220.
19J III 15.
20 On classroom debating in Tibetan monasteries, see A. Vostrikov (1935/37),
pp. 60; F. Sierksma (1964), pp. 130-42; R. A. Stein (1972), pp. 160-163; D.
Perdue (1976), pp. 29-31; and Dung-dkar Blo-bzang-'phrin-las, p. 379, note 350.
Tibetan scholastic debating has only recently begun to be studied in detail,
though its historical development has hardly been touched on. A logical analysis
of the bsdus grva debating problems has been made by Margaret E. Goldberg (1985).
There also exist two doctoral dissertations that I learned of too late to consult,
both apparently concerned mainly with bsdus grwa: Daniel E. Perdue, "Practice and
Theory of Philosophical Debate in Tibetan Buddhist Education," (University of
Virginia, 1983), and Margaret E. Goldberg, "Argument and Understanding, A Study of
Tibetan Religious Debate" (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1984). For
an account of one modern Geshe's dialectical studies, see Rato Kyongla Nawang
Losang, My Life and Lives (1977), pp. 58-74, 105f, and 109-114.
On Indian non-Buddhist practices of debating, see for instance Y. Bagchi
(1953) and E. A. Solomon (1976-78). Cf. S. S. Barlingay (1965), pp. 1938.
Important Sanskrit works on this topic include Udayana's Bodhasiddhi, Sri Harga's
Khandanakhapdakhadya, and Sankara Misra's Vadavinoda. See U. Mishra (1957-66),
vol. 2, p. 238, note.
2hJ III 15, autocommentary.



Chapter 9
COMMENTARIES ON THE MKHAS 'JUG
The Mkhas 48 like at least eight other works by Sa-pan, became in later
times a subject for the commentarial writings of Sa-skya-pa scholars. However,
only one systematic, full-length exposition of the KhJ was ever completed. This
was the Mkhas pa trams tug pali sgo'i rnam par bshad a riggaas asal byed (Mkhas
jus raam bshad- KhJNSh) by Glo-bo mkhan-chen Bsod-nams-lhun-grub (1456-1532).
Nevertheless, several minor comentarial works were written before and after Glo-
bo mkhan-chen's work, and at least one other major commentary was begun but not
finished.
The Earliest Commentators
In the colophon at the end of his commentary, Glo-bo mkhan-chen mentions
two earlier scholars who had written in connection with the KhJ. One was Sa-paņ's
disciple Lho-pa kun-mkhyen Rin-chen-dpal (f1. c. 1165-c. 1240). He is said by
Glo-bomkhan-chen to have slightly elucidated the section on Buddhist and non-
Buddhist tenets in section III of the KhJ (III 43-46). This passage by Lho-pa
was in fact intended as a clarification of the teachings on tenets (grub mtha)
found in Rje-btsun Graga-pa-rgyal-mtshan's Rnam bahad das Idan commentary on the
Heva fra Mulatantra. Lho-pa's work seems to have been a short treatise entitled
Rnan bahad dag ldan gal byed.
A second early commentarial work belonged to a slightly later period.
Though it does not survive, it is described by Glo-bo mkhan-chen as being "a few
of 'Phags-pa Rin-po-che's oral sayings set down as notes." Perhaps this refers
to a manuscript of the KhJ to which Sa-pap's nephew 'Phags-pa Blo-gros-rgyal-
ntshan (1235-1280) had added annotations or glosses that consisted of Sa-pap's own
oral explanations.
Gser-ndog Pan-chen Shakya-echos-ldan
(A) The Incomplete Commentary. Some decades before Glo-bomkhan-chen
his commentary, his former teacher Shakya-nchog-ldan (1428-1507) had
completed



208
already begun a full-length exposition of the KhJ. Yet for reasons that are now
unknown, he was not able to finish it. Only the beginning - very detailed
introduction and comment on the first few verses--survives in his published col-
lected works (vol. 24, pp. 67-102).' On the first follo there is found the title
Mkhas pa la fug pa'1 sgo'i rnan bshad dri lan dang bcas pa. Probably this title
was given by the person who compiled Shakya-mchog-Idan's complet
manuscript set of them, for the title refers also to a second work: a series of
answers to questions put to him about the KhJ. These answers to questions (dris
lan) form in fact the third work grouped under this title; just before it there is
yet another incomplete commentary on a different work, Sa-paņ's Sdeb sbyor me tog
gi chun po.
In the extant fragment of his KhJ. commentary, Shakya-uchog-Idan used all of
eighteen folios to explain only as far as KhJ I 6 with autocommentary. These
verses with autocommentary constitute less than three percent of the KhJ. Thus he
began it on a large scale and it would have been a monumental work had he finished
it. The following subject headings give a good idea of the thoroughness with
which Shakya-nchog-Idan treated his subject (the pagination here is that of the
work, not of the volume):
I. [çika'i klad kyi don)
A. mchod brjod (rtsa 'grel) (10.1)
B. rtson par dam bca' ba (rtsa 'grel) (20.1?)
II. [çika'i gzhung gi don]
A. sngon du 'gro ba thog ma'i don (20.6)
1. rang gzhung gi mtshan don la rmongs pa sel byed
2. rang gzhung mdzad po dam par rtogs byed (25.7)
a. rtsa ba gahung j1 Ita ba bzhin du sor gzhag pa (20.7)
b. "grel pa gzhung ji lta ba bzhin du sor gzhag pa
c. rtogs par dka' ba 'grel bahad kyis kha bskang ba (3.1)
i. (mchod br jod kyi) dgos pa (30.4)
ii. bsdus pa'i don (3.5)
[iii. tshig don?]
iv, mtshamns sbyar (3.3)
v. brgal lan (36.4)
3. brtsan bya malus pa mthar son byed do (4.1)
a. rtsom par dam bca' dngos
i. gzhung di Ita ba bzhin thad sor bzhag pa
(A) dgos pa't don (4a.2)
(B) bsdus pa'i don (4.3)



209
(C) mtshams sbyar (4a.4)
(D) brgal lan (40.5)
ii. țīka byed pas kha bskang ba (45.1)
(A) sgra
(1) rang bzhin
(2) rkyen
(3) rnam 'gyur (45.7)
(B) rnam par phye ba (5a.5)
(C) byed tshig (56.6)
(D) dpe (55.5)
(E) tshig gi rgyan (69.4)
LUNA
(F) dbye bsdu (6.5)
(G) grangs nges (65.1)
(H) go rims nges pa (6b.3)
b. rtsom pa po nyid kyi mtshan dang yon tan br jod pa (66.6)
i. rtsa bas mdor bstan pa
ii. de nyid 'grel pas rgyas par bshad pa
iii. 'grel bshad kyis kha bskang ba (66.7)
(A) mtshan
(B) dgos don
(C) shes par bya ba'i yul bstan pa (8a.5)
iv. [?] bsdus pa'i don (90.6)
(A) rtsa 'grel gzhung ji lta ba bzhin du bri ba
(B) gal che ba'i don tshan kha cig 'grel bsbad kyis kha balang
(1) rkang pa dang po gayis: shes bya ji ita ba la nges par mkhas
dgos pa'i don la sbyar ba (93.7)
(a) phyi rol pa dang thun mong gis dbang du byed pa
(i) thun mong du grags pa mu stegs kyi (96.2)
(11) phyi nang gang du yang mi 'du ba kla klo'i chos su
grags pa (101/2)
(b) thun mong ma yin pa sang rgyas kyi bstan pa'i dbang du
byas pa (125.1)
(i) bye mdo gnyis kyi bdag med
(ii) theg chen las/ dbu ma'i Ita ba ngos "dzin (136.4)
A. phar phyin lugs
1. rang stong
2. gzhan stong
B. sngags kyi lugs (135.6)
(2) Tkang pa phyi ma dag gis rnam dpyod kyi rtsal grub pas ni



210
shes bya ji snyed pa'i tshogs la'ang brtson 'grus rtsom dgos
par bstan pa (14.4)
(8) rig gnas chung ba (15.17)
(b) tshad ma (15a.5)
(c) sgra (155.5)
(d) gso ba (16.5)
(e) bzo (16b.4)
(£) nang rig pa (16b.7)
c. [?] bstan bcos 'di'i lus rnam par gzhag pa (185.5)
1. mkhas par bya ba'i yul bden gnyis shes tshul
11. mkhas par byed pa'i yul can rt som 'chad rtsod gsum la mkhas dgos
par bstan pa
(A) ning gi sgo nas ador bstan
(B) don gyi sgo nas rgyas par bshad pa
(1) rtsom pa la mkhas par bya dgos pa
(2) 'chad pa la mkhas par bya dgos pa
(3) rtsod pa la mkhas par bya dgos pa
(B) [Mkhas ug dris lan) The Answers to Glo-bo mkhan-chen's Questions.
The second work by Shakya-mchog-ldan on the Khu is the answera he gave to the
questions posed by his disciple Glo-bomkhan-chen. These questions numbered
twenty-one in all. The answers to them fill pages 113-149 of vol. 24 of Shakya
mchog-Idan's Collected Works, and thus they form a work of nearly the same length
as the unfinished commentary. As mentioned above, these answers occur in the
collected works a bit after the incomplete KhJ commentary, because another un-
finished exegetical work--this one on Sa-pan's Sdeb sbyor. sna shoga me torgi
chun po--intervenes between then.
The questions by Glo-bo mkhan-chen, and Shakya-achog-Idan's answers to them
are impossible to date precisely. They were seemingly written sometime after
Shakya-nchog-Idan's long visit to Lo in 1472-1474, but probably not many years
after the death of Rgyal-tshab Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug in 1478, because sometime in
the subsequent years their relations soured. When writing his questions, Glo-bo
mkhan-chen was thus probably in his late teens or early twenties. Some of the
questions may have been suggested to him by his learned tutors.
The subjects of the twenty-one questions are as follows:
(1) Does the agreepy snang ba of the KhJ (I 13, autocommentary) count as
"sound" (gra? (pp. 114.3-115.670



(2) The Rnam par bahad pali sgo badu ba and the relationship of the tshia
ming, and yi ge levels of language described in KhJ I 13-15. (pp. 115.6-
118.4)
(3) The different accounts of the twelve vowels in the Lankavatāra Sūtra.
(pp. 118.4-119.4)
(4) The originality of statements by Sa-pan in the Khu." (pp. 119.4-120.7)
(5) Different teaching methods for expounding Sutras and Tantras. (pp.
120.7-124.4)
(6) The teaching methods definitely needed for any and all scriptures,
whether Sūtra, Tantra or Šāstra (KhJ II 5, 8). (pp. 124,4-126.1)
(7) Why do all writers not use a brief introductory outline (lus rnam gzhag)
(KhJI11)? (pp. 126.1-127,4) |
(8) Why do these "doors of firm retention" belong only to Saints of the great
stages (bhūmi) (KUJ II 29, autocommentary)? (pp. 127.4-128.2)
(9) The position of the Pratyekabuddha in siddhanta (KhJ III 21). (pp.
128.2-129.4)
(10) The scriptural basis for the fivefold classification of non-Buddhist
dialecticians (KhJ III 43).12 (pp. 129.4-130.4)
(11) What passage in the Tarkajvālā states that Tirthika theories can be
classified into one hundred types (KHJ III 43, autocomentary)? (pp.
130.5-131.3)
(12) The twofold division of tenets according to permanence and annihilation
in KhJ III 43, autocomentary, and its apparent contradiction of the
Madhyamakaloka. (pp. 131.3-132.6)
(13) The classification of the Mimaņsaka as annihilationist by some Tibetan
scholars (cf. KhJ III 43). (pp. 132.6-133.3)
(14) The apparent differentiation between the Sāņkhya and the Kapila in the
Jūānasārasamuccaya (cf. KhJ III 43). (pp. 133.3-134.7)
(15) Origins of the pragmatic, materialistic doctrines of statecraft asso-
ciated with Katriya rulers (KJ III 43, autocommentary). (pp. 134.7-
135.5)
(16) Different classifications of the Mimamsaka and the Vedantin in the KhJ
(III 43) and in the Tarkavāla. (pp. 135.6-137.3)
(17) Btsun-pa Dge-srunga (Subhagupta) and his Phyl rol don sgrub: Sautrantika
or Yogācārin? (pp. 137.3-138.7)
(18) Interpretation of the statement in the Jhānasirasamuccaya about condi-
tioned objects not existing. (pp. 139.1-140.4)
(19) The classification of Dignāga as a Sakarin in the JManasarasamuccaya.
(pp. 140.4-141.7)



(20) Are there taught in authoritative scriptures any classifications of the
Madhyamaka besides Svātantrika and Prasangika (cf. KhJ III 46, auto-
commentary)?” (pp. 143.1–147.1)
(21) Are such designations as "Mdo-sde-spyod-pa'i-dbu-ma-pa" acceptable?
(Cf. KhJ III 40, autocommentary). (pp. 147.1-148.1)
Glo-bo mkhan-chen Bsod-name-lhun-grub
The only known extant and complete commentary on the KhJ is the above-
mentioned Mkhas pa rnans jug pa'i sgo'i rnas par bshad pa rig gnas sal byed
(Mkhas jug raam bshad) by Glo-bo mkhan-chen. He wrote this work at the request
of Rnam-rgyal-dpal-bzang-po, the king of Gu-ge, beginning work on it at the Nam-
syal monastery (Thub-bstan-dar-rgyas-gling-gi-chos-sde) in Lo. He completed it
after a long delay, in the thams cad 'dul year (=fire-pig, 1527) at the smaller
monastery of Bsam-grub-gling, the place in Lo where some five years later he
breathed his last. In the colophon he explains that the long delay in completing
the work was because of harms caused by "barbarians of the degenerate age" (anyiss
dus kyi kla klo). This was a reference to the Turkic Moslem raiders who
threatened to attack to several times in the early 1500s. While writing his
commentary, Glo-bo mkhan-chen was assisted by a secretary (v1 Repo), the learned
monk Kun-dgal-rgyal-mtshan-dpal-bzang-po. When he finally completed it, Glo-bo
mkhan-chen had reached the then very venerable age of seventy-one.
An old manuscript of this commentary, with alternating lines of gold and
silver characters on polished black paper, is preserved in the Toyo Bunko, Tokyo;
It is manuscript no. 43 in the Tibetan collection. The same text has been pub
11.shed in India. I am told that a different manuscript of the work also exists
in the set of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's writings that is preserved in the Lo village of
Gelung."
The Toyo Bunko manuscript of this commentary once formed the last volume in
a set of the author's collected works that had been arranged into eight physical
volumes. A few other pieces of this set also survive in the Toyo Bunko, including
volume one (ka), which is manuscript no. 44 of the Tibetan collection. This
volume is of special importance because on the verso side of the first folio there
is an inscription in which the patrons who commissioned the manuscript are named:
a hag lhe rigs mkhyen brtse'i mgon//
sa dbang bsam grub dpal rab 'bar//
Tha sras a mchog skye dgu'i dpal//
chos skyong rgyal mor bcas rnams rgyal//



The Lo ruler Beam-grub-dpal-'bar belonged to the tenth generation of the lineage
counting from the great early king A-ma-dpal, and he flourished c. 1675. His
son A-mchog Skye-dgu'i-dpal (also known as Tshe-dbang or Gtsug-rgyan-nor-bu)
succeeded him, flourishing in c. 1700. Therefore the manuscript can confidently
be dated to the second half of the 17th century.
Glo-bo mkhan-chen felt a special devotion toward Sa-pan. He records in his
autobiography that one of the turning points in his life was the inspiration and
faith that arose in him when as a young monk he read the minor writings of Sa-
pan. In the course of his scholarly career, Glo-bo mkhan-chen became the most
prolific contributor of commentarial and other secondary writings connected with
Sa-paņ's works. In addition to the KhJ commentary, he wrote on the Rigs ster,
Sdom sgum rab dbye, and Thub pa'i dgonga gsal. Though as a scholar he never
reached the attainments of his senior contemporaries Go-rama-pa and Shakya-mchog-
Idan, he was much respected within the Sa-skya and Ngor-pa traditions; he was in
fact the teacher of the Sa-skya bdag-chen Sa-lo 'Jam-pa'i-rdo-rje (Jan-dbyangs-
kun-dga'-bsod-nams) (1485-1533) and of several great masters of Ngor, including
the tenth abbot, Dkon-mchog-lhun-grub (1497-1557). His writings on the Sdom sgum
rab dbye in particular are valuable for an understanding of the late-15th-century
schism within Sa-skys-pa scholasticism caused by the controversial questions and
doctrines of Shakya-mchog-ldan."
Glo-bo mkhan-chen's interpretations of the KhJ reflected the understandings
he had worked out over many decades. He had begun his study of it when a young
man, and he tried to resolve some of its difficult points by questioning the
outstanding teacher Shākya-achog-Idan. When he finally wrote his commentary many
years later and near the end of his life, he must have viewed this work as a last
contribution to the study of Sa-pan's writings and as a final token of his loyal
devotion to that great saint and genius.
Glo-bomkhan-chen's general procedure as a commentator was sound. As he
explains in his colophon, he sought to understand Sa-pan's words in light of the
Indian Buddhist treatises on the relevant topics (in their Tibetan translations)
and in light of what Sa-paņ had taught elsewhere. While preparing the commen-
tary, he went through all of Sa-pan's accessible works, looking for explanations
of the same or similar points. He also set great store by the writings of Sa-
paņ's direct student Lho-pa kun-mkhyen Rin-chen-dpal. One finds several of Lho
pa's works quoted or cited in the commentary.
Glo-bomkhan-chen's main weakness as a commentator was with regard to
Sanskrit language and grammar. He admits in his colophon that his knowledge of
Sanskrit was far from perfect, and that therefore he has relied upon the writings
of other scholars for this and related topics. He mentions for instance that he



sent questions about various difficult points concerning grammar to the eminent
translator Zhwa-lu lo-tsa-ba Chos-skyong-bzang-po (b. 1441), and that when he
received the answers he incorporated them into the commentary. He also lists as
his sources on alapkārasastra such great early authorities as Mkhan-po Kha-che
pay-chen, Dpang-lo chen-po Blo-gros-brtan-pa, Snar-thang lo-tsä-ba Samghasri, and
Sa-bzang lo-tsa-ba Ngag-gi-dbang-phyug. However, neither here nor elsewhere
does he mention Shakya-mchog-Idan as one of his informants. Even at this late
date--some twenty years after Shakya-mchog-Idan's death--the question of Glo-bo
mkhan-chen's early studies under Shakya-mchog-ldan and their subsequent doctrinal
opposition was apparently still a sensitive issue.
As an exegete, Glo-bo mkhan-chen is often disappointing because his expla-
nations are either too brief or non-existent. On many occasions instead of a
gloss or a paraphrase he simply gives a quotation of the passage in extenso, with
no comment besides an introductory subject heading. It seems that where he
thought Sa-pan's text was understandable he preferred to let it speak for itself.
But we should be grateful for these quotes for another reason: they sometimes
contain different readings which help clarify textual problems.
Some of the most valuable and interesting parts of the commentary are Glo-
bo mkhan-chen's discussions of a general topic (spyi don) that introduce his
comments on the actual words of a particular section of the treatise (szhung don).
He gives a useful preliminary discussion of poetics (pp. 83.3-101a.1) and an
interesting sketch of the origins of the dialectical treatises that were the basis
for Indian traditions of debate (pp. 237-254a). These general discussions
indicate to what extent Tibetan scholars of the 15th and 16th centuries were
familiar with the Indian sources of their scholarly traditions.
Another important section of the commentary is the introductory biography
of Sa-skya Pandita. It is one of the longest extant biographies of Sa-paņ, being
some forty folios long in the Töy) Bunko manuscript and thus constituting about
one-eighth of the work. Printed in the Derge long-page (ideb ring) format, the
biography comes to some thirty folios, and thus it was the longest biography of
Sa-pan that is known to have existed in that time. The later versified bio-
graphy composed by Rin-spungs-pa Ngag-dbang-'jigs-med-graga-pa in 1579 comes to
some 78 folios in its Derge edition, making it the only extant biography that is
greater in sheer length." This biography by Glo-bo mkhan-chen became as long as
it did because it was filled out with extensive quotations from Sa-pap's minor
writings and with some related materials that were then only recently recovered
from Khams.
This biography won the approval of the discerning Sa-akya-pascholar and
historian "Jam-mgon A-meg-zhabs Ngag-dang-kun-dga'-bsod-nams (1597-1659). The



latter In fact admired it so much that he incorporated nearly the whole of it into
his classic history of the Sa-skya 'Khon family, the Sa skya dung rabschen no.
In the colophon to that work, A-mes-zhabs lists many of his sources, but strangely
enough he does not mention the source of this biography, even though it forms
nearly one-tenth of his work. Nevertheless, Glo-bo mkhan-chen's name does
appear at least once in this lengthy quotation. On p. 100.2 (506.2), A-nes-zhaba
indicates that Glo-bo mkhan-chen was the source of a short explanatory note (mchan
bu). The note reads: 'di'i khri yol zange tsha'i mdgad palang khyad par "phags pa
yin zhes chos nie glo bo mkhan chen pas bshad do. In the commentary itself (p.
76.7) there is this similar note, apparently the addition of one of Glo-bo mkhan-
chen's students: 'di'i khri yol zangs tshas mdzad pa'ang khyad par phare gsung
ngo.
A-nes-zhabs copied the biography almost word-for-word (compare KhJNSH, PP.
40.3-43b.3). One significant departure from Glo-bo mkhan-chen's text that I have
noticed is an addition by A-mes-zhabs to the list of Sa-pan's writings on Pp.
60a.4-6la.6 (compare KhJNSH, . 22a.3). Others are the letter of invitation
purportedly sent by the Mongol prince Kidän to Sa-pan (pp. 156.4-162.1 [785.4-
816.1]), and the letter ostensibly sent by Sa-par to the Tibetans after his
meeting with Kidän (p. 134.1-6 [67b.1-6]).
Mkhan-chen Ngas-dang-chos-grags
The most recent commentarial work on the Khu came from the pen of mkhan-
chen Ngag-abang-chos-grags (1572-1641). This commentary itself is not now avail-
able, and it is known only from lists of its author's writings. One of these
Hists is found in a bibliography of Sa-skya-pa works entitled Dkar chas chos mdzod
bye ba't ide mig that was compiled in the early 1960s by the Venerable Khenpo
Appey and slightly supplemented later by another scholar. For the contents of
rare collected works, Khenpo Appey based himself mainly on a notebook of 'Jan-
dbyanga Mkhyen-brtse'1-dbang-po (1820-1892) written in the latter's own hand.
Khenpo Appey was able to borrow this notebook from the Mkhyen-b
1960 when compiling the bibliography in Sikkin, but its present whereabouts are
unknown.
In that bibliography, the title of Ngag-dbang-chos-graga's commentary 18
given as Mkhas pafur sgo'i dgongs pa spyi'i ngas gis bata pa legs bshad nor
bu'l phreng mndzes. This title indicates that the work was a general exposition of
the purport of the work. An almost identical title for this work is given in the
biography of Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, the second source where the work is



216
mentioned. The only difference between the wordings of the titles is that the
biography gives ston pa in the place of bstan pa.
It is regrettable that this commentary is not available, for it promises by
its title to discuss the main points that Sa-pan had in mind when writing the KhJ.
One would expect that Ngag-dbang-chos-grags explained in it some of the thornier
passages in the work. Ngag-dang-chos-graga's comments would in any case deserve
careful consideration because he was one of the last great panditas of the sa-
skya-pas.
There is reason to think that this commentary is still extant. The col-
lected writings of Ngag-dbang-chos-grags are reported by a recent Tibetan visitor
to Sa-skya to survive there still, in the Lha-khang chen-mo. With a little luck,
this work may turn up among them.
Conclusion
Thus the KhJ was commented upon by some of the greatest scholars of the Se-
skya-pa tradition. But strangely enough, no living Sa-sky-pa scholar known to me
remembered reading any of these commentaries in Tibet. A possible reason for this
was that the KhJ was not one of the works regularly studied and taught in the sa-
skya-pa seminaries in recent times (nor was it a core work in the So-skya-pa
curriculums during the previous periods of highly flourishing scholarship). The
greatest scholars of all traditions no doubt continued to read it from Sa-pap's
time down to the present, but one would guess that the formal public exposition
(bahad pe) of the work within the Sa-sky-pa had died out by the late 17th or
early-18th century as a part of the general decline of Sa-akya-pa scholarship in
an era dominated politically and economically by the Dga'-Idan pho-brang and the
great Dge-lugs-pa convents.
Another reason some of these commentaries were unknown to recent scholars
from Tibet was that the writings of most of these commentators were, in general,
very scarce in Tibet. The writings of Glo-bo mkhan-chen, for instance, did not
circulate widely, except for the few works that had been published from Ngor by
xylographic printing; even those of his works that had been printed at Derge
remained more or less unknown. In the case of Shakya-mchog-ldan's writings,
there was an additional reason for their scarcity: they had been forcibly sup-
pressed by the Dge-lugs-pe authorities since the 17th century. Of course his
writings that have to do directly with the KhJ are minor or fragmentary works
they would not in any case have been likely to circulate widely apart from the
collected works. One might have expected at least the commentary by Ngag-dbang-



chos-grags to have been known to modern Sa-skya-pa scholars. He was a highly
reputed savant, and many of his works were not only printed but also in common use
as textbooks (vig cha) in the college of scriptural and dialectical studies shad
arwa) at Sa-akya. But the KhJ itself was not part of any curriculum of studies,
and this commentary on it was certainly not a required textbook. Indeed, it is
not yet definitely known whether it was actually ever printed together with the
numerous other published works of Ngag-dbang-chos-grags.
HERE
More
CE
SL



218
NOTES
*See D. Jackson (1983a). There I listed commentaries on eight works in-
cluding the Khu. Since then I have come across a commentarial writing on a ninth
work. This is Ngor dpon-slob Ngag-dbang-legs-grub's Phyag ntshan ri mo'i bstod
tshig las phros pa'i dris lan, which was a clarification of Sa-pan's small Phyar
mtshan ri mo'l bstod tshig (TB no. 75). This."commentary" (actually it was a
reply to questions) was published at the end of Ngag-dbang-legs-grub's Yongs
rdzos batan pa'i nyams len sdoe pe sum gtan la 'bebs pa om dbyangs blama't
drongs royan . See pp. 192f of the Khams xylograph of both works that has been
republished from New Delhi in 1979 by T. G. Dhong thog Rinpoche.
-KhJnSh, p. 301b.2: lho pa kun mkhyen rin chen dpal svis dag ldan grub
Etha'i Kual byed đu/ le's RSum pa'i phyi nang gi Brub mtha'i nal byed cung tau
byas pa. This apparently refers to the passage on pp. 2630.6-265b.5. Lho-pa is
again quoted on the Madhyamaka view on pp. 281a.6-283a.2. The quote from the Rnam
bshad dag ldan begins on p. 265a.1.
Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, Brtar pa gyis pa' enam par bahad pa me dar pa
rnama Noms par byed pa'i rnam grel dag ldan, SKKB, vol. 3, pp. 133.2.4-3.4. Cf.
KhJNSh, pp. 265a. 1-265b.5. The verse commented upon is levara Tantra 1,2,12.
See D. Snellgrove (1959), vol. 2, pp. 36f and the commentary, p. 132.
"Dkon-achog-Thun-grub's Gaan yig Chos kyi rje, p. 1443.1) records that the
lung transmission for this work existed in the 16th century. There it is listed
as: lho pas mdzad pa'1 dag ldan grub stha'i gal byed. Also listed is Lho-pa's
(and Duar-ston's) Legs bahad sgrung 'grel.
Glo-bo mkhan-chen in his KhJNSH, p. 263.6, introduces the passage with the
words: 'di dag gi don la chos kyi rje'i gsung sgros dre ba'i bshes goyen lho pa
kun mkhyen kis bkod pa ni. Compare the later reference to Lho-pa's unavailable
Gsung sgros ma commentary on the Bodhisattvacar yavatara (KhJNSh, P. 281a.6): 'di
dag nyid chen po'i dgongs pa 1 Ita ba bzhin tu lho pa kun mkhyen
rin chen dpal gyis spyod ug ti ka gsung sgros mar bkod [281b) pa ni.
PAJNSH, P. 301b.2: bla ma chos kyl rgyal po phaga pa rin po che '1 Raung
gi sgros mchan bur btab pa phran tshegs tsam.



219
'If this is the meaning, as I take it to be, a better reading would be rin
poches instead of rin po che'1. "Phags-pa would then have been merely the
recorder of the "oral sayings" (sung gi agros), and Sa-paņ vould be the probable
source of them, as in the case of the above-mentioned Gsung sgros ma commentary of
Lho-pa. "Phags-pa himself was not known to have been a great master of grammar
poetics, Sanskrit, or Pramāņa, and thus it is unlikely that he originated these
explanations. See also the Blue Annals of 'Gos lo-tsa-ba (G. Roerich (1976), p.
784), where 'Phage-pa is said to have admitted not having learned Sa-pan's works
Tshis gigter, and Sdeb abyor sna tshops me tog gi chun pe. 'Phags-pa, however,
did know some poetics and was certainly capable of elegant composition.
'I am indebted to Mr. E. Gene Smith for first showing me this work. Kun-
dga'-grol-achog. Zhen , p. 240.3, also referred to this work in a list of
Shakya-mchog-Idan's minor works. Other works by Shakya-mchog-Idan are found
11sted in Kun-dga'-grol-mchog, Rnam thar zur, pp. 4a-4b.
on this commentary see D. Jackson (1983a), pp. 78.
Glo-bomkhan-chen records in his autobiography (Rte btaun bsod nams, P.
27a) that the signal of Shakya-mchog-Idan's worsened attitude toward him came in
the latter's reply to Glo-bo mkhan-chen's request that he write a detailed bio-
graphy of Rgyal-tshab Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug (1424-1478). As it turned out, Glo-bo
mkhan-chen himself wrote the only known biography of Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug. This
is a short work entitled Bla ma'i roam thar rin chen phreng ba, of which I once
read a 16-folio manuscript in Lumbini. It also exists in the Toyo Bunko, Tokyo,
where it is found in the fragments of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's works, vol. ka, PP.
146b.1-178a.1. He wrote this work in a dog year (14907).
Relations between the two were still good as late an 1479, for that is when
Shakya-mchog-Idan wrote a history of Rngog lo-tså-ba Blowldan-shes-rab and his
school at Glo-bo mkhan-chen's request. See Shakya-mchog-Idan, Rngos lo totshaba
chen pos batan pa it Itar bskyanga pa'i tshul ndo tsan du bya ba ngo mtshar gtam
gyi rol mo, Collected Works, vol. 16, p. 456.
Shakya-mchog-Idan in his answer to this question refers to a criticism of
the KhJ by Dpang lo-tsi-ba, but states that Dpang lo erred there in considering
the sgra spyi snang ba as permanent.
Shakya-mchog-ldan's answer was that the KhJ vas not intended to teach
anything that was new or not contained in the great treatises of Buddhist India.



220
But because in Sa-pap's time the methods of composition, exposition and debate had
80 far not been well explained in Tibet, Sa-pan was motivated precisely to
expound these topics.
I have studied this question (and Shakya-mchog-Idan's answer) in more
detail in D. Jackson (1985), p. 9, note 7.
This question gave Shakya-mchog-Idan an opportunity to explain his posi-
tion regarding the gahan atong tradition of Madhyamaka. Glo-bo mkhan-chen could
never agree with Shakya-achog-ldan's teachings on this point.
14XhJNSH, p. 3016.4. The Gu-ge king may have been Glo-bomkhan-chen's
cousin since the latter's mother was a Gu-ge princess. The king may also have
been the Rnam-rgyal-dpal-bzang-po of Gu-ge mentioned near the beginning of a long
11st of Shakya-mchog-Idan's students. See Kun-dga'-grol-uchog, Paodita, p. 228.
KHUNSH, p. 301a.5. The threatened invasions which apparently never
materialized for Lo proper disrupted life in many parts of Western Tibet in the
early 1500s. See for instance Kun-dga'-grol-nchog, Dpal Idan, pp. 900.2, 930.5,
and 106a. See also the biography of Legs-ldan-bdud-joms-rdo-rje in Khetsun
Sangpo, Biographical Dictionary, vol. 3, pp. 383 and 385. The disturbances re-
ferred to in the latter seem to date to 1520-21. See further the biography of the
"Ba'-ra-ba teacher Nam-mkhal-rdo-rje (1486-1553) in the Bkal brgyud aser phreng
chen mo, vol. 2, p. 591, where it is mentioned that there were such dangers c.
1527: dgung lo bzhi bcu zhe gnyis kyi dus sustod phyogs nas hor si '1ige pa
chen po 'byung ba. Other references are found in Dkon-mchog-yon-tan-rgyal-atshan,
R1-khrod-pa, Dros "dod kun "byung, pp. 229.5, 677.2, 998.5 and 1001.3.
The general Mirza Haidar under the Chagatay sultan Sa'id of Yarkand invaded
Ladakh and Western Tibet in 1531 and 1548, according to N. Ellased, and E.
Denison Ross, trans., A History of the Moghuls of Central Asia, pp. 12-15, 270 and
456. H. Hoffmann (1975), p. 31, mentions invasions in 1517 and 1533.
16 New Delhi, Ngawang Topeye, 1979.
*Another manuscript may survive in the Sa-skya Lha-khang-chen-mo. One of
Glo-bomkhan-chen's main disciples was Sa-lo Jam-dbyanga-kun-dgal-bsod-nans
(also called "Jan-pa'i-rdo-rje). The practice of reciting the lung of Glo-bo
mkhan-chen's collected works continued at Sa-skya until at least the time of
Sngags-'chang Ngag-dang-kun-dga'-rin-chen (1517-1584). See A-nes-zhabs, Dzam



221
gling, p. 546.3. At one time one or more manuscripts of Glo-bomkhan-chen's
writings also existed at Ngor.
Some of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's main commentarial writings were also printed at
Derge, perhaps as late as four decades ago. See below, note 20. In addition,
manuscripts of many of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's works were taken to Beijing and are now
kept in the Mi-rigs-dpe-udzod-khang there. See vol. 1 of the library catalogue,
Bod gangs can, under Klo-bo mkhan-chen.
1 on the dating of this ruler and his son, see D. Jackson (1984), pp. 129.
*G10-bo mkhan-chen, Rje btsun baod nams, p. 21a.
he was about 16.
This event happened when
On the Rige gter, Glo-bo mkhan-chen composed the commentary Tshad me riga
pa'l ster svisrel pa'i rnam par bshad pa rigs, pa malus a la aug pa'i $80.
According to the colophon, he wrote it in 1482, i.e. when only twenty-six years of
age (he could be expected to have received considerable help from his tutors).
This work has already been published twice: once from Gangtok (s. T. Kazi, 1970)
on the basis of a cursive MS from Glo-bo, and a second time from Dehra Dun (Pal
Ewam Choden Ngorpa Centre, 1985) on the basis of the Derge xylo
different title. Another important work on the Rigs gter was his Riga gter la nye
bar mkho ba mtha' gnyis asal ba. Finally, Glo-bo mkhan-chen also composed a work
which identifies the purvapakşas in the Rigs gter: Tshad ma rige gter syi phyogs
snga rnam par bshad pa rigs lam gsal byed.
In connection with the Thub pa'i dgongs Asal, Glo-bo mkhan-chen wrote at
least three works. One of these is a collection of Sutra quotations which are
intended to help teachers expounding the text. It is entitled Thub pa'1 dsongs
pagsal ba'i betan bcos kyi mdo rnam par bshad pa rin po che'i gter. A silver-
letter manuscript of this work survives in the Toyo Bunko, Tokyo. In addition, he
wrote at least two other teaching aids 'chad thabs) on the Thub pa'i dgongs asal.
One is potentially of great importance because it gives an account of the obscure
proverbs or fables (gtam brgyud) that Sa-pan alludes to as illustrations of cer-
tain points. In one index of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's works, this commentary is listed
by the title Royal sras lam bzang gi skabs kyi stam brgyud nyer mlho. A similar
commentary was composed by Sa-pan's disciple Zhang Mdo-sde-dpal, and it was
printed at Derge, apparently with Glo-bo mkhan-chen's works. As for the third
"teaching and" for the Thub pa'i dgongs gsal, there is some confusion in the
indexes regarding its title; there may in fact exist a fourth such work. See D.
Jackson (1983a), pp. 4. But the extant xylograph from Derge is said to bear the



222
title Thub pa'i dgongs gsal sy 'chad thabs jam dbyangs dgongs rgyan.
Glo-bokhan-chen wrote at least five works in connection with the Sdom
gsum rab dbye:
(1) Sdom pa gsum syi rab tu dbye ba'1 dka' ba'1 gnas rnam par bshad pazhib
mo rnam 'thag
(2) Sdom sum brgal lan tshig don mun sel
(3) Sdom pa gsum svi rab tu dbye ba'i dris lan lung gi tshad ma
(4) Skal idan snying gi mun sel lha dbang rdo sie
(5) Sdom pa gsum svi skabs kyi bde sahegs snying po'lgsal byed
Probably all five have some connection with the controversy raised by Shakya-
mchog-Idan's questioning of the Sdom geum rab dbye. The first and longest of
these was an explication of certain difficult points in the Sdom soumrab dbye.
This and the second work were printed from wooden blocks at Ngor. I have seen a
136-folio manuscript copy made from the Ngor par-ma edition of the first work,
through the kindness of Mr. E. Gene Smith. An original xylograph of the work (and
also of number 4) was photographed in 1984 by the German-Nepal Manuscript Preser-
vation Project. See L. van der Kuijp (1985b), PP. 92. Number 4 is also access-
1ble as a silver-letter manuscript now in the Toyo Bunko. For more details, see
D. Jackson (1983a), PP. 18f.
Of the above-mentioned commentaries and polemical works, fortunately most
were also printed at Derge, seemingly in the late 1940s. These are listed in the
recent index to the Derge printery by Ekra-shis-rdo-rje (Chendu: Si khron mi rigs
dpe skrun khang, 1983), pp. 328-330, as follows: mkhan chen bsod sama Lhun grub
legs pa'i 'byung gnas kyi gsung 'bum la
[1] Sdebdun mdo dang bcas pa'i dgonga 'grel tshad ma rigs pa'i gter syi
grel ba'1 rnam bahad rig lam gsal ba'i nyima Ideb 207
(2) Thub pa dgonge sal gyi 'chad thabs jau dbyangs dgongs rgyan ldeb 15
[3) Thub pe'i dgonga pagsal ba'i bstan bcos kyi mdo roam par bahad pa rin ne
che'i ster ldeb 78
[4) Thub pa'i dgonge sal rgyal sras 'phage pa'i lam ayi sgrung grel zla
ba'i 'od zer Ideb 144
[5] Dkar chag Ideb 1
[6] Spyi rnam brgal lan og min gaal byed gong ma'i (sic) dgongs rayan deb
11
[7] Slob pon bood nams rtse mos mdzad pa'i rgyud sde spyi yi tam par bahag
pa'i gsal byed nyi, ma'i 'od zer Ideb 44
[8) Mngon par toge pa rin chen 1 jon shing 81. gsel byed rin chensgron me
ldeb 49



223
[9] Sdom gsum svi rab tu 'byed pa'i dris lan lung gi tahad ma 'khrul spong
dgongs rgyan ldeb 57
[10] Mkhas pa rnams jug pa'i sgo yi rnam par bshad pa rig gnas gal byed
'phrul gvi me long ldeb 304
[11] Sde bdun mdo dang bcas pa'i dgongs 'grel tahad m iragter le nye bar
mkho ba mtha' gnyis gsal byed ldeb 4
[12] Tshad ma rigs gter syi phyogs snga rnam par bshad pa rig lam ggal byed.
Ideb 29 rnama mkhan chen gsungs so/.
Prints of numbers 6 and 7, as pointed out to me by Mr. Tashi. Tsering, are avail-
able on microfiche from IASWR, Stonybrook. See also J. Kolmas (1971), nos. 11.073
(1449) and 11.074 (1450). Somehow in Kolmaš's index the title pages of these
works were included among those of the writings of Mi-pham-rgya-mtaho. Most 10
not all of these Derge xylographs have now been reprinted by the Pal Exam Chodan
Ngorpa Centre, Manduwalla, Dehra Dun. Eleven of these Derge prints are also
listed in an index of the Tibetan holdings of the Mi-rigs-dpe-md zod-khang.
Beijing. See Bod gangs can, vol. 1, pp. 88f.
For two detailed indexes of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's complete works, see
below, Appendixes J and K. Cf. the list of many of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's works--
fragments of at least two manuscript sets of his works which probably came from
Sa-skya or Ngor--found in vol. 1, pp. 68-88, of Bod gange can (the Beijing Mi-
rigs-dpe-mdzod-khang index of some one hundred and eighty collected works) under
the heading "Klo-bo mkhan-chen," and E. Gene Smith (1970a), which is based on the
Sa skya pa'i dkar chag compiled by Khenpo Appey.
Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyi mkhas (Thimphu ed.), p. 259, also cites
Glo-bo mkhan-chen in this connection.
KHJNSH, p. 301b.5. In addition, Glo-bo mkhan-chen used materials that
Sa-pap had translated, having apparently had access to a collection of his trans-
lations. He mentions in an introduction that he wrote to a Sa skya bka' 'bum
index the interesting fact that there were traditionally a four-part and a six-
part collection of Sa-pan's complete works. The latter included the works that he
had translated, whereas the former, which was taken as the mo
collection, did not. See his Skyes rtsa, p. 304.5: chos kyi rie sa skya pandita'i
bka! 'bum la/ dum bzhi dang/ dum drug tu grags pa gnyia byung ba las/ phyi ma
la ni syur mdzad pa nams kyang bcug par snang bas/ snge ma dbang rtsan la
For instance, one of the works he consulted in preparing his Sde bdun mdo...phyors
anga, was the supplementary explanations that Sa-pap added to the Viseşastavasika
of Prajavarman. See the colophon appearing in the Peking Tanjur, vol. 46, P.



26.3.3-8: khyad par du phage par bstod pa'i rgya cher. bahad pa/ slob dpon shes
rab go chas andrad pa las/ bar skabs su tshiga su bcad pa bcu gnyis ki grel pa
EXYa dpe ma rnyed nas/ dus phyis shakya'i dge slong kun dga' rgyal mtshandpal
bzang po zhea bya ba/ dpal s skya'i dgon par sbyar ba rdzogs so//. I an indebted
to Mr. L. van der Kuijp for the latter reference, which reached me as this book
was going to press. Thus this completion of that comentary is a work mentioned
in some gaan vir lists, including Gong-dkar 'Phrin-las-rnan-rgyal's where it was
listed as (9) Khyad par "phars pa bstod pa rgya cher 'srel pa'i khaskong. 5
folios. See also Dalai bla-ma V, no. 14, and Rin-spungs-pa, no. 69.
23 See above, note 4.
"KhJNSh, pp. 5a.5, 596.3, 242.5, 251a.1, 2631.6, 281a.6. These works
included his biography of Sa-paņ (p. 59,5), a biography of Prajfákaramati (p.
25la.l), his Dag ldan grub mtha'i gsal byed (p. 301b.2), and his gsung agros ma
commentary on the BCA (p. 281a.6). The latter in particular is thought to pre-
serve Sa-paņ's own explanations, being based on Lho-pa's notes set down during or
after Sa-pan's lectures. The recent Khams xylograph of the latter is not now
accessible. Glo-bo mkhan-chen in his Rigs gter commentary, Sde bdun mo...rnam
bahad, pp. 38.3 (195.3) and 404.4 (2025,6), also quotes from Lho-pa's Pramapa
commentary, the Sde bdun sal ba'i rgyan. See also his citation of this work in
Sde bdun mdo...nye bar nkho, p. 63.3 (3.3), as quoted above, chapter 6, note 73.
Kh.JNSh, pp. 301b.6-302a.4. In the commentary itself, Zhwa-lu lo-tsa-ba
is referred to on pp. 83.2, 2205.5, and 221b.2. c. Glo-bo mkhan-chen's letter
to Zhwa-lu lo-tsa-ba entitled Zha lu lo tsa ba la dris lan ndzad pa, Collected
Works, vol. 3, pp. 53.1-55.3.
These are cited for instance in the following places:
Mkhan-po Kha-che pan-chen (Jan-dbyangs Kha-che Beod-name-dpal, teacher of
Rong-ston), p. 1780.6.
Dpang lo-tsi-ba Blo-gros-brtan-pa, pp. 145a.5, 1625.1, 1725.1, 1785.6,
1845.5, and 187b.2.
Snar-thang lo-ts-ba Samghari, pp. 1275.2, 128.6, 1520.4, 1591.3, 1616.5,
1625.1, 1726.4, 176a,1, 1766.5, 180a.5, 1840.6, and 187b.1.
Sa-bzang 10-tsa-ba Ngag-gi-dbang-phyug, P. 153b.3.
"I have taken this count from the biography as it is incorporated in the
Sa akya sdung robe chen no (1.e. 'Dzam gling ...) of A-mes-habs, PP. 94.4-154.5



225
(476-77b). The approximate lengths of the main extant biographies in their Derge
editions are:
Rin-spungs-pa, 78 ff.
Glo-bo mkhan-chen, 30 ff.
Rin-chen-dpal, 19 ff.
Zhang Rgyal-ba-dpal, 11 ff.
The Gsung agros ma (i.e. Dpal sa...), 10 ff.
Lam 'bras slobbshad (Derge ed.), vol. ka, pp. 67b-145a.
47KHJNS), p. 33b,5. A brief note here states: dris lan syl rim pa sam po
'di sngan chad dar ba ma byung ya[ng]/ mdo khams nas rdo rje 'chang kun dga!
dbang phyug. si. phyas tu byung ba las bris pa vin no. The first three replies to
questions are:
(1) Mdo khams kyi ston pa blo gros rab gsal gyi dris lan (pp. 30.3-320.4;
see TB no. 97)
(2) Rnal 'byor pa phru me pa zhes pas dris pa'i lan (pp. 32.5-336.4; see TB
no. 99)
(3) A very brief and probably apocryphal untitled reply to a question about
Sa-pan's criticism of the ring bsrel relics (pp. 336.4-34a.4). This passage
also appears in the Gaung gros ma biography ascribed to Ngor-chen, Lam
'bras slob bshad (Derge ed.), vol. 1, pp. 625.5-63a.2.
A little later in the Khush, a fourth work ascribed to Bi-fi appears:
(4) Rtogs ldan rayan po'i dris lan (pp. 39a.3-429,6; see TB no. 32).
Though all four purport to be the work of Lha-rje Bi-ji, one of Sa-pap's dis-
ciples, the first two and the fourth came to be included in Sa-pan's bka! bum by
the time of the tenth Ngor abbot Dkon-nchog-lhun-grub (1497-1557), and they were
printed in the Derge edition of the Sa skya bka' 'bum. As Glo-bo mkhan-chen
indicates, these three works became known in Central and Western Tibet only in the
time of the fourth Ngor abbot Rgyal-tshab Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug (1424-1478).
That Kun-dga'-dbang-phyug had searched out such materials in Khams and
later brought them to Glo-bo is also indicated by Glo-bo mkhan-chen in his index
to a Sa skya bka' 'bum whose arrangement was mainly based on Ngor-ch
See his Skyes rtsa, p. 304.5: de yang san zig gya mtsho las 11 ltar byung ba
bzhin bzhag pa'i stengs su bka! 'bum 'thor bu ba't nang tshangazhig bdag 21
dren padam pa kun sal dbang phyue gis mdo khams nas dpetsad chod nas "dir
bsnams byon pa ga zhig kyang chud yod pas shin tu rgyas pa zhig bzhi



226
pp. 4a,3-43b.3, is found in A-mes-zhabs, "Dzam gling, pp. 94.5-
*UkhJNSh,
154.5 (476-77b).
*A-mes-zhabs, "Dzam gling, p. 666 (333).
"I am grateful to Mr. E. G. Smith for first showing me this index and for
indicating that a KhJ commentary by Ngag-dbang-chos-grags was listed in it. The
supplements seem to have been added mainly from Ngag-dbang-chos-grags, Bod kyl
mkhas.
"Dgon-gsar-ba Beod-nams-rgyal-mtshan, Dpal ldan bla ma, Lam 'bras slob
bahad (Dehra Dun ed.), vol. 4 (nga), p. 356.3 (178b.3).
"I know of only three references to the formal public exposition of the
KhJ by great Sa-akya-pa scholastic teachers. Two of the teachers were Rong-ston
Shes-bya-kun-rig (1367-1449) and Shakya-mchog-ldan (1428-1507). See respectively
the biography of Rong-ston by Shakya-mchog-ldan: Rie btsun thams cad, p. 320.1,
and the biography of Shakya-mchog-ldan by Jo-nang Kun-dga'-grol-mchog, in the
former's collected works: Pandi ta, p. 76.6. In addition, the much earlier Sa-
skya-pa scholar Mi-nyag pag-chen Rig[s]-pa'i-seng-ge (1287-1375) formally studied
the KJ in Gtsang in about 1322. According to his biography Mkhan chen bka! bzhi
pa rig pa'i seng ge'i rnam par thar pa yon tan rin po che'i rgya mtaho (Dehra Dun:
Sakya Centre), p. 24 (12b), he studied the following works of Sa-pan mainly under
Slob-dpon Gzhon-nu-mgon-po:
(1) Legs par bshad pa rin po che'i gter
(2) Mkhas pa ug pali sgo
(3) Sdom gsum rab dbye
(4) Sdeb sbyor me tog chun po
(5) Thub pa'i dgonge sal
(6) and (7) Sema bakyed chen mo dana de'i Lungsbyor
(8) Sgra nye bar bsdus pa'i tshig bcad
(9) Phyoga bcu'1 sange rgyas la bstod pa'i phreng ba (sic)
(10) Soyi mortogs ldan syi dris lan
Before that he had studied an eleventh work, the Rige gter with slob-dpon Byams-
ngon-pa, also known as Phyogs-glang-gear-ma. See ibid. p. 21.1 (11a.1).
At least two works connected with the Sdom gaum rab dbye by Glo-bo mkhan-
chen were reprinted at Ngor--the Sdom pa gsum svi rab tu dbye ba'i dka! ba'i gnas
rnam par bshad pa zhib mo rnam 'thag and Sdom geum brgal lan tshia don mun sel-



227
and quite a few of his other commentarial writings were printed at Derge. See
Gange can syi, p. 217.4, and above, note 20.
It seems likely that these works of Glo-bo mkhan-chen were carved rather
late at Derge, and that this accounts for their not having circulated widely. T.
G. Dhongthog Rinpoche was the only scholar I have met who came into contact with
any of these works in their Derge edition. He remembered that his teacher mkhan-
po Me-nyag Dam-chos had used Glo-bo mkhan-chen's Riga ster commentary for detailed
explanations when teaching the Rigs gter in 1951 at the Rdzong-gsar bshad-grva,
near Derge.
"It is said that along with the writings of Shakya-mchog-Idan (whose szhan
atong theory linked his with the similarly proscribed Jo-nang. Taranatha), the
works of the other great 15th-century Sa-skya-pa savants Stag-tshang lo-tsa-ba and
Go-bo rab-byams-pa vere also suppressed, their printing being prohibited. All
three were guilty of the same offence: criticism of Tsong-kha-pa. It was not
until the fairly recent publication of Go-rans-pa's works from Derge by Sga bla-ma
'Jam-dbyangs-rgyal-mtshan (1870-1940) at the suggestion of Mkhan-chen Gzhan-dga'
Guhan-phan-chos-kyi-snang-ba (1871-1927) that the Sa-skya-pas regained easy access
to one of these scholars' complete works in printed form. That printing is
mentioned for instance by E. G. Smith (1969b), pp. 32€, and it is described in
detail by Sde-gzhung sprul-sku Kun-dga' bstan-pa'1-nyi-ma in his biography of
'Jam-dbangs-rgyal-mtshan: Riebtsun bla ma dam palam dbyanga rayal mtshan ayi
rnam thar mdor badus skal bzang rna rgyan (New Delhi: T. G. Dhongthog Rinpoche,
1983), pp. 25.2-37.2 (130.2-19a.2).



E
UR



Chapter 10
THE CRITICAL EDITION: SOURCES AND METHOD
A. The Texts
The following edition of the third main section (le'w) of the KhJ is based
on a comparison of four exemplars:
B: a Bhutanese manuscript
D: the Derge xylographic edition
G: a manuscript from Glo-bo Smon-thang (Mustang)
C: The commentary on the KhJ by Glo-bo mkhan-chen (KJNSh), in a manuscript
from Glo-bo
The first three embody the complete work, while the last is a commentary which
contains many extensive quotations. Many other quotes of the KhJ--especially of
the basic verses can also be found in Tibetan literature. Yet since these are
almost never decisive in improving the readings, I have not collated them
systematically.
B: The Bhutanese Manuscript
Text B 1s a Bhutanese manuscript preserved in Pha-jo-lding monastery in
Bhutan. A reproduction of the manuscript was published from Thimphu in 1979 by
Tulku Kunsang Gyatso. The title page of the new publication begins Bóes pa'i
phring vil gi ti ka and 'Phags pa klu sgrub kyi rtogs be jod mdor bsdus because in
fact this same volume also contains the reproductions of some other manuscript
works from that monastery. These include a commentary on the Suhrllekha of
Nagarjuna," and a brief biography of Nagarjuna by one Ngag-gi-dbang-phyug-dge-
legs-rgya-at sho'1-sde. At the end of the volume there appear three works of Sa-
skya Paņdita:
(1) Mkhas pa fug pa'i sgo (52 ff; pp. 131-234)
(2) Sgra nye bar bsdus pa'i tshigs su bcad pa (1 f; pp. 234-235)



230
(3) Byis pa bde blag tu fug pa'1 rnam par bshad pa byis a la phan (11
ff; pp. 235-255)
However, at the beginning of the first work' (p. 131), on the title page and in
the table of contents of the recent reproduction there appears the title Byis pa
bde blag tulus pa'i raam par bshad pa mkhas pa ius pa'i sgo, a combination of
the titles of the first and third works.
I have not had the chance to examine the Pha-jo-lding manuscript itself; I
have only had access to the reproduction, which does not yield sufficient informa-
tion to date the manuscript precisely. In any case, the manuscript itself cannot
be earlier than the mid-15th century, for the texts of Sa-pan's works derived from
a xylographic edition of that period. The manuscript preserves at its end (p.
255) what appears at first sight to be the colophon from that earlier printed
edition:
1/ op svasti
Igyal sras kun las lha, pali snying stobs can//
sa la thub bstan spel wdzad chos kyi rie//
rte btsun kun dga' rnam rgyal dpal bzang po'i//
bka' bzhin byis pa bde blag ug pa'i gzhung 'di par du sgrub pa vi//
'thun skyen grong roying dge ba'i grong nas bsgrubs//
dag byed chos kyl spyan 1dan dpal "dzin bzang//
par svi rig byed mthar son bzod pa phell/
The fourth line thus identifies the original xylograph as having been one of the
many Sa-skya-pa works that were printed in the mid-15th century under the pa-
tronage of the noble monk Gong-dkar-rdo-rje-gdan-pa Kun-dga'-rnan-rgyal (1432-
1496).
The ultimate origin of the Bhutanese manuscript in the Gong-dkar-ba edition
is further indicated by the marginal notation of nga ca that was retained by the
later manuscripts. These characters mark the works as forming the fifth fascicle
(ca) of the fourth main section (nga) of a major collection. That major collec-
tion was the Saskya bka! "bum, with its five main sections made up of the
writings of the five great founders of Sa-skya in their chronological sequence.
The other extant fragments of this edition, a few writings of Slob-dpon Bsod-nans-
rtse-mo and Rje-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan, are similarly marked as belonging to
the second (kha) and third (8) main sections, respectively. The Bhutanese
manuscript is probably a few copies removed from the Gong-dkar-ba edition. It
contains many scribal errors. Moreover, it incorporates two folios out of order,
and one of them contains a dittography some sixteen syllables in length (or



231
twenty-nine written characters long, counting three shad).
If the Bhutanese manuscript contained the original colophon, it would
establish that the blocks were carved in or after 1458, for that is when Gong-
dkar-ba received the ordained name Kun-dga'-rna-rgyal. But in fact the wording
of the original xylograph is different. I was fortunate enough to come across in
Tibet a fragment of this same fascicle (nga ca) of the original Gong-dkar edition.
What survived was the last page of the KhJ as well as the next two complete works:
(1) Mkhas pa rnans jug pa'i sgo. Fascicle nga ca, f. 46a.1-5. The text
begins with the words mkhas pa 'dod pali skye bo nyung bas na/l.
(2) Sgra nye bar badus pa't tshiga su bcad p. Fasc. ngacaf. 461.5-
466.6.
(3) Byis pa bde blax tuus pa'i rnam par bahad pa byts pa la phan po.
Faac. nga Ca, ff. 46.6-558.7.
The numbering of the last folio is given as nga lnga byon, indicating that
this fascicle was complete in fifty-five folios. The printing colophon (par
byang) for the fascicle begins at 55a.8, and it reads:
// on Swasti/
Isyal sras kun las lhag pa'i snying stobs can//
sa la thub bstan spel mdzad chos rgyal byung//
de ni dpal ldan grwa lngar br jod pa des//
mkhas rnams jug pa'i sgo khang gtsſulg gyur pa//
mtshungs med gzh[u]ng 'di par du sgrub pa vi//
'thun rkyen grong raying dge ba'i grong nas bsgrubs//
dag byed chos kyi spyan ldan dpal "dzin bzang//
par gyi rig byed mthar son bzod pa 'phel//
In this version, then, the name of the patron is given as Grwa-Inga, and he
is referred to as a "religious ruler" (chos rgyal). This is no doubt the original
colophon. The version found in the Bhutanese manuscript substituted the following
three lines for lines 2-5 of the original:
sa la thub bstan spel mdzad chos kyi rje//
rle btsun kun dga' rnas rgyal dpal bzang poli/
bka! behin byis pa bde blag'lug pa'i gzhung 'di par du sgrub pa x1//



232
This change was probably introduced by a later scribe or patron who wished to
clarify who the original sponsor of the Gong-dkar-ba edition had been. Some oth
tampering with the text is evident, for example in the long unmetrical fourth
line which would not have been allowed to stand in a printed edition.
D: The Derge Edition
For the living Tibetan tradition, the Derge xylographic edition is the
standard edition of the Sa skya bka' 'bum as a whole and, by extension, of the
particular treatises contained in it, such as the Kh). The exemplar of D is the
print brought out of Tibet by the former Ngor Thar-rtse mkhan-po, Baod-nams-rgya-
mtsho, which was subsequently reproduced under his supervision in 1968 when he was
at the Toyo Bunko in Tokyo.
The original blocks of the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum (most of which still
survive in the Sde-dge Par-khang-chen-mo) were carved in Derge in the mid-1730s.
This large project was undertaken initially as the result of a request made to the
Derge king Batan-pa-tshe-ring by the 30th mkhan-po of Ngor, Bkra-shis-lhun-grub.
That Derge king was a great patron of Buddhism, and he had especially close ties
with the Ngor-pas. By that time he had already sponsored the printing of the
more than one hundred volumes of the Kanjur, and later in his life he would have
the rest of the Tibetan Buddhist canon--the even more massive Tanjur--carved onto
printing blocks. When asked on this occasion by Bkra-shis-lhun-arub to sponsor
the printing of the Sa skya bka' 'bum, he is said to have immediately given his
joyful assent.
According to the record preserved in the index this edition, the king
deputed one of his main ministers, Gnyer-pa A-srung, to be the chief overseer of
the project. The secretary (drung yig) Tshe-ring-phel and the bursar (phyag
mdzod) Gu-ru-bkra-shis were appointed to be foremen of the workers and to assist
in handling the responsibilities of the work. The worker in charge of bringing
out and storing the completed blocks--a formidable task when dealing with large
collections--was the par dpon Gzung-skyabs.
The Sa skya bka' 'bum was indeed a large collection, consisting as it did
of fifteen volumes in the Derge long-page (ldeb ring) format. Each volume had
about three hundred folios and thus about six hundred printing blocks. The prob-
lem of editing and proofreading such an enormous corpus (approximately 9,000
pages in all) posed great difficulties. Errors could be incorporated at any
stage, but the most difficult and dangerous stage was the establishing of a
correct original (madpe). For this the method of the Derge editors was to



233
compare the readings of all available manuscripts and xylographs, and to chose the
best reading where differences were detected. The editors of the Sa skya bka'
'bum had the following manuscripts at their disposal:
(1) from Skyor-ada' Bsan-gling-dgon-pa (in Chab-mdo district): a "very cor-
rect" set of the complete Sa skya bka' 'bum.
(2) from Sga Khri-du-dgon: the collected works of Sa-pan and Chos-rgyal
"Phags-pa arranged into six volumes and written in gold and silver letters.
These manuscripts may have dated from the late-13th century since they are
said to have been the sacred possessions of Sga A-gnyan-dam-pa (1. second
half of the 13th c.).10
(3) from Sga Thar-lam-dgon: a complete set commissioned by Rab-'byams-pa Kun-
dga'-ye-shes, a disciple of Rong-ston Shes-bya-kun-rig and Ngor-chen Kun-
dga'-bzang-po.
(4) from Sde-dge dgon-chen: two complete sets, one commissioned by former
rulers and the other by the present king Bstan-pa-tshe-ring."
(5) from Icags-ra Beam-grub-rtse and Bsam-grub-gling (two monasteries near
Derge), one complete set from each.
(6) several volumes from an incomplete set originally commissioned by the
earlier Ngor mkhan-po Sangs-rgyas-phun-tshogs.
Thus there were a total of six complete and two incomplete sets. In addition,
they had access to an undetermined number of works in the 15th-century Gong-dkar-
ba edition. Though the mention of the latter is strangely absent from the Derge
Sa skya bka' 'bum index, it is found in the autobiography of the chief editor and
proofreader, Zhu-chen Tshul-khrins-rin-chen.
Zhu-chen was only one member of the editorial staff which established the
text of the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum. Beneath him there also worked three other
editors and proofreaders, including Rmugs-sangs-pa Sbyin-pa-rgya-atsho and Batan-
'dzin-rgyal-mtshan who are described as experts in ancient and modern terminology
and orthography. 14
When comparing the various manuscripts, Zhu-chen noticed an interesting
fact regarding certain works of the first three Sa-akya founders. He found that
where the wording of the different witnesses varied greatly, three types of
"edition" or version could often be discerned. One "edition" type was extremely
concise, and it probably represented the form of the composition when it was first
completed and immediately disseminated by the authors' disciples. A second
"edition" type seemed certain to be a later expanded revision by the authors
themselves. The third type of "edition" was where Sa-skya Pandita had evidently



edited the works of his predecessors, sometimes slightly expanding passages and
sometimes slightly condensing very extensive topical summaries."
In the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum index Zhu-chen also explains a little about
how he and his assistants solved textual problems and chose among the different
readings they found. When dealing with commentarial works, their first recourse
was the basic text that the commentary aimed to expound. Where discernable, they
followed the reading that best accorded with the basic text. Those passages that
could not be clarified in this way were examined by the editors (and, according to
the index, by mkhan-po Bkra-shis-lhun-grub) to see if they could decide the cor
rect reading on the basis of their own knowledge. Where they felt certain of the
correct meaning. they emended the text or chose the best reading. Where they
could not be sure, they left the doubtful reading, marking it with a sign or small
annotation so that it could be examined later."
In theory their editorial policy should have been very conservative. The
writings of the founders were thought of as sacred and immutable vajra-vords (rdo
re'i tshis); to tamper with their substance was a great sacrilege. But with
regard to the "accidentals" of the text such as spelling and punctuation, they had
freedom to emend. In this perhaps they simply followed the editorial style al-
ready established by S1-tu Pan-chen during the editing of the Derge Kanjur. The
assistant editors included experts in old and new terminology and orthography,
as well as in the established practices of the system of Tibetan grammar attri-
buted to Thu-nl Sambhoga." Thus they followed the practices preferred by the
most learned scribes and scholars of early-18th-century Khams. No doubt they
found much to "correct," for their materials consisted of works composed in a much
earlier era, the 12th and 13th centuries, and the physical books themselves dated
from as early as the 13th to as late as the 18th century.
The editors modernized and standardized the spellings of certain nouns and
adjectives. They also emended the spellings of some verbs (sometimes changing
their "tense" or aspect). They regularized the sandhi of the various grammatical
particles (such as zhes, ces, etc.), thus bringing them in line with current
grammatical usage under the influence of Si-tu's grammar?). They also seem to
have done more sometimes--substituting phonetically similar grammatical particles
(such as syi for kvis) one for the other, where the sense of the passage seemed to
demand it. This, however, was emendation of a different order. It would require
a sure understanding of the sense of the passage, since such changes could alter
the substance of the text. Unfortunately, the editors probably had neither the
time nor the background in studies to be able to determine accurately the sense of
each sentence. Indeed, they lacked the time to compare slowly and carefully the
six or more witnesses word by word (they were able to hand over the corrected and



235
proofread copy for all fifteen volumes in about a year and a half). Instead, they
probably followed a less thoroughgoing procedure that was common in other printing
projects of Khans in the present century: First they would select the "best"
manuscript or xylograph as the base text (phyi mo-here for many works the base
text was probably the "very correct" manuscript from Skyor-uda' monastery. This
would be read aloud by one person while some or all of the other manuscripts were
read silently by the others, every difference or problem being noted. Phonetical-
ly similar readings could thus be easily overlooked. Careful letter-by-letter,
word-by-word examination of all witnesses was probably limited to passages where
serious differences or problems were found.
Some details of the economics of this printing project are also recorded in
the index. For the preparation of the master manuscript and for the actual block
carving. sixteen scribes of special merit and about one hundred and fifty skilled
carvers were assembled. For their work they received payment in whatever form
they desired--horses, cattle, tea, cloth, etc.--but the wage scales were reckoned
in measures of barley:22
The editors received 11 dong per day.
The carvers of the depictions of deities that appeared on the first folios
(dbu lha) received 1 khal, 2 zho for each figure.
Scribes of the highest level received 15 'dong for each page, those of medium
level received 14 1/2 "dong, and those of the lowest level received 12
'dong.
Carvers of the highest level received 2 khal, 2 zho for each page; those
better carvers of the middle level received 2 khal, 1 zho, 5 dong: those
ordinary carvers of the middle level received 2 khal, i zho; and those of
the lower level received 2 khal.
The dravers of lines and the preparers of paper received 4 dong per day.
Wood cutters were paid 1 zho for every 7 zhar of wood they cut.
The work was done at Sde-dge Lhun-grub-steng. It began on the fifteenth
day of the fourth lunar month--one of the great Buddhist holy days--of the wood-
tiger year (1734). The scribes finished writing out the master copies on the
fourteenth day of the eighth lunar month of the next year (1735). The carving
was finally completed and the blocks arranged in their storage racks during the
fire-dragon year (1736) that followed.
Much of the above information about the Derge Sa skya bka''bum derives
from its index, & vork entitled Dpal sa skya'i riebtsun gong na lnga '1 gsung rab
rin poche'i par gyi sgo 'pher 'byed pa'i dkar chag "phrul syi lde mig that was



236
written at the time of the block carving and that forms the last work in the final
volume. By all appearances the work was written by the mkhan-pokra-shis-lhun-
grub: his name is mentioned as author in the colophon, and elsewhere in the work
where the word "T" (bdag) appears, it refers to him. But the actual compiler
and author of the index was the chief editor, Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen, who
is referred to in the work as "my attendant" (rang gi nye ba 'khor).
Here we have an instance of false ascription, a fairly common occurence in
later Tibetan literature. Sometimes when a great religious figure would arrange
for the composition of a work, that great person's name and not the name of the
real author eventually appeared in the colophon. In the present case, the Ngor
mkhan-po was the main instigator of the whole printing project, and he had been
specifically requested by the royal patron to compose the index. But when the
time came to write it, he fell 111 with an ailment called 'bam (thrombosis?) that
prevented him from working on it. Moreover, conveniently near at hand was the
modest Tshul-khrims-rin-chen, who anyhow was probably his superior
elegant prose and ornate verse. (Ghost writing of this sort is sometimes still
practiced by Tibetans even today, though its propriety now does not go completely
unquestioned.)
Falsely ascribed works such as this are usually impossible to detect from
Internal evidence alone. Here it could be identified mainly because another
account of the preparation of this edition survives in the autobiography of the
true author. Zhu-chen Tshul-khrims-rin-chen recounts that originally the plan
was for him to lay the groundwork of the index (i.e. to do the basic work of
compilation and a draft of any additional sections that were needed?), and for the
mkhan-po to correct and embellish this as necessary. Because of the mkhan-po's
illness, however, the entire job in the end fell upon Zhu-chen's own shoulders.
After he had composed the index, the mkhan-po approved it without any major
changes or additions, and sent it to the ruler Batan-pa-tshe-ring for his
Inspection. Since the latter also liked it very much, it was carved onto blocks
immediately.29
G: The Glo-bo Golden Manuscript
This is a beautiful manuscript from Glo-bo Smon-thang, written in gold dbu
can characters on polished black paper. I located it in Nepal in June of 1983,
and I was able to borrow it long enough to have it microfilmed. The text is 95
folios long, with each folio measuring 8.7 x 35.9 cms. The text forms fol. 46-140
of vol. 16 (ma) of a manuscript of the Sa skya bka' 'bum. Sa-pan's works



237
comprised at least four volumes in this manuscript collection, for the following
fragments in Nepal are among those that survive:
(1) Rol so'i batan bcos. Vol. ma, ff. 36-45.
(2) Mkhas pa jug pa't sgo. Vol. ma, ff. 46-140.
(3) Sgra la tug pa. Vol. ma, ff. 141-154.
(4) Thub pa dgongs gsal. Vol. tshs, ff. 42-209.
(5) Glo bo lo tsa ba shes rab rin chen la spring yig. Vol. dza, ff. 266-269.
(6) Zhang lo taa ba la spring yig. Vol. dza, ff. 269-271.
(7) Bkal gdans de bskor ba'i zhus lan. Vol. dze, ff. 271-275.
(8) Thos bsam som sum svi bris (sic) lan. Vol. dza, ff. 275-278.
(9) Snye mo sgom chen gyi bris [sic] lan. Vol. dza, ff. 278-283.
(10) Blogsal zhing don du gnyer ba'i skyes bu rnams kyi bris [sic] lan.
Vol. dza, ff. 283-284.
(11) Rta nag ri khud kyi rnga bo che la bstod pa. Vol. dza, ff. 284.
(12) Mu stege gyi ston pa drug tshar bcad dus sbyor ba'i snyan ngag. Vol.
dze, ff. 285.
(13) Ba gor zhes bya'i sgra la grangs pali stod [sic] pa. Vol. dza, ff.
286f.
(14) Chos spyod bcu pa. Vol. dza, ff. 288.
(15) Smra ba gnyis pa. Vol. dza, f. 289.
(16) Yum rayas 'bring sdus gsum gyi don. Vol. dza, ff. 289.
Of these, numbers 14 and 16 are of special interest since neither is found in the
Derge edition. 31
The ultimate origin of this manuscript was the library of the Lo Mustang
rajas, and a golden manuscript (Rser chos) of this quality would most likely have
been commissioned by one of the past Lo rulers. The precious materials and
excellent craftsmanship of the manuscript mark it as the product of one of the
high points in the cultural history of Lo, such as the reigns of the great kinga
of the 15th century. Manuscript sets of the Sa skya bka' 'bum are recorded to
have been commissioned by the kings A-mgon-bzang-po (r. ca. 1435-1460) and A-seng
Rdo-rje-brtan-pa (r. ca. 1489-1496). At present there is not enough evidence
for a firm dating of this manuscript, but a more accurate determination may one
day become possible if the first or index volume of this set can be located.



238
C: The KhJ Commentary of Glo-bo mkhan-chen (KHJNSH)
As mentioned in the previous chapter, Glo-bo mkhan-chen's commentary on the
KhJ contains extensive quotations from the basic text, and thus it is valuable
also for textual reasons. The available copy of the work is a manuscript from Lo
now preserved in the Tõyo Bunko, Tokyo (Tibetan collection, vol. 43). It is 303
folios long and is written in gold and silver dbu chen characters on black paper.
It formed the eighth and final volume of a manuscript set of Glo-bo mkhan-chen's
collected works that was commissioned by the late-17th-century Lo ruler Bsan-grub-
dpal-'bar (see above, chapter 9). A modern edition of this work also exists,
having been published from New Delhi in 1979. Though printed in black letters on
white paper, the text is identical to the above-mentioned manuscript in all but a
few very minor details..
Glo-bo mkhan-chen does not specify the source of his KhJ text. He wrote
the work in Lo in the early 1500s and probably had access to more than one manu-
script there. When trying to wrest some sense from corrupt passages, he must have
searched in other manuscripts for better readings. Occasionally he must have
emended the text if he felt certain of what Sa-paņ intended.
T. G. Dhongthog Rinpoche, New Delhi, 1967
In addition to the above four exemplars, there are three modern editions,
each of which is derived from the Derge edition. The first to appear was the
edition calligraphed and published by T. G. Dhongthog Rinpoche from New Delhi in
1967. It includes a four-page introduction by the publisher, as well as a verse
on the title page enjoining all who want to practice scholarly activities to study
this book. This is a fairly faithful copy of a Derge print of the Khu, with only
a few corrections and minor errors. The original print which was th
this edition was from the library of H. H. the Sakya Trizin.
Beijing, 1981
This next edition of the KhJ was published from Beijing in 1981 by the Mi-
rigs-par-bkrun-khang. It includes a very brief introduction (p. 1) that identi-
fies the author and main contents of the book. The two men who prepared the text
for printing are named on the last page (p. 158): Rgyal-sras Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang
and Mgon-po-rgyal-mtshan. On that same page it is also written that the book was



239
published in accordance with a Lhasa xylograph (deb 'di lhe sashing par. ltar
bsgriga nas bakrun payin). If this statement is accurate, the edition was based
on a previously unknown xylographic edition. A careful examination of the text,
however, reveals that it is almost identical with D. What differences there are
seem to be just printing errors and minor, obvious corrections. If there was in
fact a Lhasa edition, it must have been copied from the Derge edition and thus
would possess no independent value.
Rajpur Dehra Dun). 1983
Almost as soon as a copy of the Beijing edition found its way to India, it
was reprinted. There could be no better indication of the enthusiastic reception
many of the new Tibetan publications are receiving from the Tibetans living out-
side of Tibet and China. Moreover, since these publications are not bound by any
copyright restrictions, they can be freely reproduced. In this case the pub-
lisher of the Indian reprint was Migmar Tsetan of the Sakya Centre, Rajpur.
B. Method of Editing
My basic goal in preparing this edition was simply to find and remove as
many errors as possible. To do this, my first step was to study the textus
receptus edition D) with teacher and commentary, in order to understand the
general contents of the work and to note any particularly problematical readings.
When I came to the actual editing work, I began by collating the four exemplars
and noting every difference except those of punctuation. Then I selected the best
reading by considering the probable intent of the author and the nature
possible causes of the differences.
I was not able to follow a strict method of recension and stenmatic analy-
sis. This was because several of the exemplars are probably confla
have double or multiple ancestors. For example, it is recorded that the editors
of Dhad direct access to seven different manuscripts and possibly one earlier
xylograph when preparing their edition. Since text B also derives from a xylo-
graph, 1t too may easily have been contaminated during its preparation. Even the
Khu quotations in the autograph KhJNSh (the ancestor of C) were probably conflated
in places by its author when the latter checked other manuscripts to verify or
correct possibly corrupt passages.



240
Stili, collating the four exemplars was indispensable for locating and
understanding many errors. The work of collating uncovered many slight and un-
important differences in the "accidentals" of the text such as orthography and
punctuation. D for example followed a later, standardized orthography that was
different from that of the others. Collation also uncovered many more substan-
tial errors, quite a few of which could be recognized as typical scribal errors
such as dittography and homoeoteleuton (eye-skip to a similar word below). But
the most difficult passages--1.e. where more than one variant seemed acceptable
or where none was probable-- could only be resolved by considering the author's
intent in light of the immediate context of the passage, the author's other works,
and the tradition in which he stood.
For elucidating many of the difficulties in the text, I am much indebted to
the Venerable Khenpo Appey, principal of the Sakya College, Rajpur. In 1982 he
explained to me part III of the Khu line by line, and in the course of this he
often pointed out problems of grammar and likely corruptions. At that time our
text was D (in Dhongthog Rinpoche's edition), and so we often compared D (TB), B,
and where possible, C. (At that time G had not yet been located.) In a few
passages the Khenpo suggested emendations, but in this he was very conservative:
emending the text was considered the last and most desperate measure.
I did the collating and final editing in 1983–84, after I had left India
and reached Japan. By then I had located text G in Nepal and could thus base the
edition on a comparison of three and sometimes four exemplars. The discovery of G
was valuable. I was gratified several times to find that G supported the emenda-
tions that Khenpo Appey had proposed.
Orthography and Punctuation
Two styles of orthography can be discerned among the four exemplars. One
is an older orthography and is witnessed to by B, C, and G. The other is the
never standardized orthography of D. In my edition I have attempted to follow the
earlier orthography since it is more likely to reflect the original usage of the
author.
For the punctuation, however, in most cases I have followed D. The main
exceptions were where the placement of a shad or its absence made the versifica-
tion wrong or made the passage hard to understand. Punctuation in general is the
most fluid aspect of Tibetan texts. Since it is also relatively much less impor-
tant than spelling, I decided not to note all variants of punctuation or to try to
reconstruct an earlier punctuation.



241
Versification
Sa-pan wrote most of the KhJ in two parts: (1) a versified basic text (rtsa
be mula), and (2) a prose autocommentary. Unfortunately the divisions between
the verse and prose portions are not always clear in the available exemplars. The
problem of separating the two and of numbering the verses is made even more
difficult because Sa-paņ did not always employ verses of four lines each. He
states in his KhJ and Rol mo'i batan bcos that in religious or mundane composi-
tions, a Aloka (tshige bcad) or verse can consist of from two to six lines,
whereas in kavya (sayan ngag) each verse must have four lines. Accordingly the
KhJ itself, which is not a work of kavya but a technical treatise, contains verses
that number from two to six lines. Often this is obvious because there is prose
autocommentary between verses of, say, two or three lines. But where several
verses appear consecutively, they can only be divided according to the complete-
ness of sense of the lines. In many cases they could be divided into the usual
four-line verses, while occasionally other divisions were required, and I have
numbered the verses accordingly.
In a text written or printed in du can script, all verses--whether by the
same author or quotations from other works-should be indicated by the presence of
two shads after each line. In the Khy, however, scribal or editorial errors have
confused the borders of verse and prose at various places in the four exemplars.
In some passages, verse has been assimilated into the prose commentary, while in a
few other passages to shad have been added at appropriate intervals in the prose,
what seem to be more lines of verse in the basic text. I have tried
to sort these out by comparing the different exemplars and considering the sense.
As a rule, Sa-pan does not break or divide individual lines of verse to
gloss or explain. But there are two exceptions in the KhJ: verses I 13 and I 14.
The third line of I 13 begins yi gezhes bshad and ends dbyange sal byed.
Between these two pieces, he inserts the definition of a vi se. Moreover, the
fourth line of I 13 is one of the few versified lines that stand alone (see also I
45c and II 2a, b, c)." The division of I 14 also occurs in the third line. It
begins ming yin and later concludes de vi khyad par dag.
One problem I faced in numbering the verses was how to deal with the
several summary verses (bsdu ba'i tshigs bcad) and intermediate stanzas (bar skabs
kyi tahiga bcad). Though it could be argued that they belong more properly to the
autocommentary, here I have numbered them among the verses of the basic text.
Still another problem was how to number the first six and final six verses of the
work, i.e. the introductory verses before the real beginning of part I and the
concluding verses after part III proper has ended. Rather than establish two more
40



parts (o and IV). I have included them within parts I and III.
The Typeset Text and the Annotation
The edited text presented below is an enlarged and corrected photocopy of
R, the 1983 Rajpur reprint of the 1981 Beijing edition. I have chosen to present
the text in Tibetan characters because in this form it is more likely to be used
by its videst potential readership: scholars and students of Tibetan nationality.
In the Beijing edition, all verses-whether from the basic text or from quotes
are indented and given line by line." To the basic verses I have added ay own
verse numbers in parentheses at the end of the final line of each verse. In the
text and in the left margin, I have indicated for the sake of easy reference the
places where each page of the three complete texts (B, D, and G) begins. But to
avoid cluttering up the margins, I have indicated the locations of the quotes from
C only in the notes. In the right margin I have added numbers to every fifth
line to facilitate counting.
In the notes I have listed the variant readings consecutively and according
to the line and page in which they occur. I have listed the preferred reading
(1.e., the one actually shown in the edited text) first, the most similar readings
next, and the more different ones last. The sources of the variants are indicated
by the initials of the texts (B, C, D, or G). Variants of one and the same word
or phrase are separated by colons, while variants of different words or phrases
are separated by semicolons.
Finally, in C and G 1t sometimes happens that a misspelled word or re-
dundant phrase (c.8. a dittography) was noticed by a later scribe or proofreader
and was marked as such by the placement of three dots over each unnecessary or
incorrect character or syllable. I have indicated this in the notes either by
underlining the incorrect character (e.g. brtsod G) or by stating "marked as
incorrect."



243
NOTES
See for example Shakya-mchog-ldan, Dam pa'i chos mngon, pp. 332-335, which
quotes KhJ II 1-5, 8-10, 14-23, and III 54-58, 61-69. The locations of other
quotations of KhJ III are given in the notes to the translation.
"The printed edition from Gra Byams-pa-gling of a work on this topic by
Byams-gling pan-chen (1400-1475) is listed in Gangs can gyi, . 212.2 (22.2): gra
byams pa gling du pap chen byans sling gsung bahes spring 'grel par/ 62.
Pha-jo-Iding was the seat of the Rje mkhan-po Shakya-rin-chen (1710-1759)
and was the source of the surviving manuscript of Shakya-echog-Idan's collected
works. Could the ancestors of these manuscripts too have been gathered from Tibet
at the same time?
"For more on the Gong-dkar-ba edition, see above, chapter 3, and D. Jackson
(1983), pp. 7-16.
The follos out of order in B are: (1) p. 141.4, beginning with uspe and
ending on p. 142.4, ntshan pa, and (2) p. 142.4, beginning with trams la skyon and
ending on p. 143.6, nges par ai. The dittography occurs on p. 142.3: kyi yul na
yin te shes bya ma yin pa'i phyir rolig rten tha snyad.
On the Derge printery and the works printed in it, see Lokesh Chandra
(1961), pp. 507-516; J. Kolmas (1971); and the recent indexes published from
China: Bkra-shis-rdo-rje, Ko-btso, Sde dge par khang. It is technically incorrect
to speak of the Derge edition because over the years some blocks must have become
damaged, broken or worn out, and thus required replacing. It would be more exact
to speak of "printings" of Derge blocks.
'On the king Batan-pa-tshe-ring, see J. Kolmas (1968), pp. 36-40.
On the religious patronage of the Derge kings, see E. Gene Smith (1970),
Pp. 23, 25.
[ Zhu-chen). Dpal sa, p. 341.1.4 ba 272a).



-USga A-gnyan-dam-pa is said to have been a monk who was appointed a
regional ruler in Khams under 'Phags-pa. He appears in some mgon po lineages.
Sometimes his name is given as "A-nan," i.e. as "Ananda" (i.e. Kun-dga' (grags)).
See also above, chapter 3, note 18.
*In the index ([Zhu-chen). Dpal sa), p. 341.2.4, these two are described
as "extremely excellent" (shin tu legs pa). But in Zhu-chen, Chos sura, p. 474,
only one set from Derge is mentioned. The set commissioned by Batan-pa-tshe-ring
is elsewhere said by Zhu-chen (ibid., p. 473) not to have been known for having a
very correct text.
In Zhu-chen, Chos smra, p. 474, the complete sets are said to have
numbered only five. The manuscript set commissioned by Batan-pa-tshe-ring that
was mentioned in the previous note was apparently not actually used.
"'Ibid., p. 475. Cf. [Zhu-chen). Dpal sa, p. 341.2.5. On Zhu-chen's
family background and his study of iconometry and painting, see D. Jackson
(1984a), pp. 144.
"Zhu-chen, Chos amra, p. 474, lists his three assistants as follows:
(1) Gsal-1dan Mgon-po-bkra-shis
(2) Spo-lung drung-yig Blo-gros-pa
(3) Rmugs-sangs Sbyin-pa-rgya-mt sho
*Ibid., p. 475. As Zhu-chen noted, Sa-pan at one point intended to write
on Tantra in depth. Later, however, he decided that it would be better if the
Tantric writings of the three early founders circulated widely. See Sa-pan, Nga
brgyad ma'l, P. 151.3.4 (tha 305b). Therefore instead of composing his own
treatises on this subject, Sa-paņ undertook to revise some of their main Tantric
works. For another mention of Sa-pan's editorial work, see Zhu-chen, Dpal ldan,
vol. 2, p. 401, as quoted below, note 20.
1[Zhu-chen). Dpal sa, p. 341.3.2: ma nges pa rhams sor bzhag la rtage dang
nchan bu yod par bgvis nas dpyad rung bzhag ste/. So far in my readings I have
not noticed any such marks or notes. This procedure was not specified again by
Zhu-chen in his autobiography (Chos smra), p. 476. Moreover, in the latter ac-
count there is no mention of Bkra-shis-lhun-grub having actually participated.



245
"The same style was presumably continued by Zhu-chen when he edited the
Derge Tanjur.
[Zhu-chen), Dpal sa, p. 341.2.6: gsar rnying brda'i khyad. La mkhas pa.
"Zhu-chen, Chossma, P. 474: dpal ldan thu nu lo toa ballschung gi lugs
srol la rnam pa dpyod pa'i 'dren byed.
20
Zhu-chen elsewhere records that Gong-dkar-ba xylographs were used as the
base text at least once. This was for Grags-pa-rgyal-mtshan's Rgyu ade spyi'i
ruangzhag dang rgyud kyi mngon par rtogs pa'i stong thun sa bcad. SKKB, vol. 3,
pp. 70.2.1-81.2.6. See Zhu-chen's Dpal ldan, vol. 2, P. 401: stong thun sa bcad
ngor/ bla ma dang dpal Idan birva pa la phya, 'tshal dang/ sange rayas kyi chos
thams cad kyi. gsung gi don kye'i rdo nje zhes yod pa/ 'd1'1 phyl. mo song dkar
bali par ma las bahus pas thun mong ba'i lam rim skabs kyi sa bcad badus tsam las
med kyang di nyid yongs graga yin pa dang/ slad nas sa pap gyis ezhung gnyia
po'i zhus dag mdzad pa'1 skaba cung zad bsdus pe yin nam snyasszhan du sngon
sy dpe rying rnams las spyi lon syi gzhung nas 11 Itar byung ba'i sa bcad shin
tu rayas pa can mang po 'byung/.
This same passage occurs in the Derge Sa skya bka' 'bum index ([Zhu-chen),
Dpal sa). p. 323.1.3.
“The result of this procedure was conflation of the texts. The readings
of one text vould predominate, but here and there the readings from some other
witnesses were introduced.
"Salaries of officials were always expressed in measures of barley in
Tibet. See T. W. D. Shakabpa (1967), p. 10; N. Rhodes (1980), p. 261.
231 Zhu-chen). Dpal sa, p. 341.3.3.
Ibid., p. 342.1.6: shing yos khrums stod zla baltshes bcu bahu rie
brtse ba chen po dang sa skya pan chen gnyis ka't thuge chos (342.2.1) dbyinge zab
mo mnyam par ghar pa'1 zla dus kyi mchod pa'i nyin. Khruns stod zla ba is the
eighth lunar month. Sa-pan actually passed away in the eleventh lunar month (smal
po or ago zla.
Ibid., p. 341.3.2: bdag gis kyang dpyad pa'i groga byas. From the colo-
phon (p. 343.1.4-5): dge slong bkra shis lhun grubkyis/ ... bgyie .



246
26Ibid., p. 431.2.6.
"See E. Gene Smith (1969b), p. 102, and (1970), p. 19 and notes 38 and 40,
who Bentions several works falsely ascribed to the Fifth Dalai Lama and Sde-srid
Sangs-rgyas-rgya-mtsho.
The Venerable Dezhung Rinpoche has pointed out to me that in this case a
connoisseur of Tibetan literature might also detect Tshul-khrima-rin-chen's dis-
tinctive style at least in the versified passages of the work.
29Zhu-chen, Chos smra, pp. 477–478.
3 Through the help of Mr. Leonard van der Kuijp. It was also possible to
have these manuscripts microfilmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Project, running
nos. D 1784-D 1800. Three fragments of this same manuscript survive in the Toyo
Bunko Tibetan collection (manuscript 42). I have also determined that the Rise
gter rang 'grel manuscript in the 11 brary of H. H. Sakya Trixin also belongs to
the same set. On this manuscript see also below, Appendix D.
Both works, however, are found in the list of Sa-pap's writings in Rin-
spunga-pa, Wam pa'i (see Appendix E, nos. 70 and 71). The Chos spyod bcu pe alone
is found in the 11st of A-mes-zhabs, "Dzam gling (see Appendix F, no. 30), and it
is referred to in the Thcs, p. 8.3.6.
The Tsarang Molla, p. 10a, states that A-mgon-bzang-po commissioned a set
of the Sa skya bka' 'bum in gold letters. See D. Jackson (1984), pp. 147 and 164.
The more detailed genealogical history Blo bo chos rgyal, p. 221, also mentions a
Sa skya bka' 'bum Commissioned by the same king, though not specifying that it was
in golden letters. The same work, p. 35b, mentions a Sa skya bka! 'bum manuscript
of 20 volumes on white paper in black letter, and on p. 361 it mentions a set
consisting of 31 volumes that was written out in gold letters on black paper under
the patronage of A-seng Rdo-rje-brtan-pa. The set on white paper is said to have
been offered to Glo-bo mkhan-chen, the younger brother of this ruler. The latter
set is said to have been commissioned in commemoration of the passing of their
mother, who had been a princess of Gu-ge. Still another manuscript Sa skya bka'
"bun is recorded to have been commissioned in Lo at the death of Rgyal-tshab Kun-
dga'-dbang-phyug (1424-1478). See Glo-bo mkhan-chen, Bla ma'rnanthar, P.
176b.2.



247
Both have identical handwriting and pagination. Also note that ff. 192-
193 are out of order in both. There also exists a Derge edition of this commenta-
ry, which was recently reproduced in India. It reached me too late to be used.
**See for example his reading rkyang pa ba at the end of the autocommentary
to III 43 (edited text, p. 133.2), KhJNSH, p. 2616.4. In ibid. p. 266b.3. Glo-bo
michan-chen explains this terminology as being the opinion of Gtsang-nag-pa's
disciples.
Compare the 'Phan-po Nalendra edition of the Gzhung luge legs par bshad
pa (a forgery attributed to Sa-pan) that is preserved in the Library of Tibetan
Works and Archives, Dharamsala (kha, 7, 9, 2954). It seems to have been a direct
copy of a Derge print. It has, for example, the same pagination and the same tha
in the margin. But the location of the blocks is stated in the final xylographic
colophon:
spar byang smon tshix bcas pa 'di ni dgesbyong ngag dbang blo gros kyla 80/
spar 'di shri nalendra'i mthong smon grva tahang la bzhugs/.
China at present has no domestic copyright laws, and therefore it cannot
join any international copyright convention.
*KJ I 89 - p. 89.2.5 (tha 176.5) and Rol mo'i, p. 79.1.3 (46.3):
rkang pa gnyis nas drug gi bar//
ngag don 'brel na tshigs bcad scig//
Cf. the Abhidharmasamuccaya, commentary by Gzhan-dga', Chos mangon, P.
(1400.1), where tshiga bcad pa'l sde is defined as from two to six rtsa bas.
279.1
38KJ I 13c - D. p. 83.2.1 (tha 1676.1).
39 KJ I 130 - D. p. 83.2.3 (tha 1675.3):
de vi dbye bsdu dir ma bahad/t.
EhJI 45c - D, p. 85.4.1 (tha 172b.1):
gel zhig br jod pa bde ba'ang phyir/l.
KhJ II 2 - D, p. 94.3.3 (tha 90a.3):
et sang mkhas azhan la phan par. 'dod/I.
KhJ II 2b - D, p. 94.3.4 (tha 90a. 4):
blo asal shes 'dod bla mar gus/.
KAJ II 2c - D. p. 94.3.5 (tha 90a.5):
lung rige rjes su Rdams pa'o//.



248
*on these types of verses, see below, KhJ III translation, notes 60 and
*** But some verses were overlooked and some prose passages erroneously
considered as versified text. These I have tried to correct.
ELE
SUS



THE MKHAS 'JUG
SECTION III



251
EDITED TEXT OF THE MKHAS JUG
SECTION III
G65p
དེ་ལྟར་བཤད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་ཚུལ་བསྟན་ནས། གྲུབ་པའི་མཐའ་
བླང་བ་དང་དོར་བར་ཤེས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རྩོད་པའི་ཚུལ་བཤད་ན།
འབེལ་བའི་གཏམ་ལ་སྦྱོར་དངོས་རྗེས།
སྦྱོར་བ་རྩོད་པའི་ལམ་སྦྱང་ཕྱིར།
རྒོལ་བ་གཉིས་དང་དཔང་པོ་རྣམས།
ངེས་པར་བྱས་ནས་''རྗོད་ལ་འཇུག། (IIL 2)
ཆོས་དང་འཐུན་པའི་བདེན་པ་མེན་ཅིང་ནོར་བ་འདོར་བའི་སྒོ་ནས་
འབེལ་བའི་གཏམ་གྱིས་རྩོད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་ལ་གསུམ་སྟེ། སྦྱོར་བ་རྒོལ་བ་
ངེས་པའི་ ཕྱིར་རྩོད་པའི་ལམ་སྦྱོང་བ། དངོས་གཞི་བསྟན་པ་བསྲུང་བའི་
ཕྱིར་བརྒལ་ལན་གྱིས་དོན་གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པ། མཇུག་ཚོགས་ པས་གཟུང་ 10
བདེ་བའི་ཕྱིར་ངག་བསྡུས་ཏེ་བརྡ་སྤྲད་པའོ།།
དང་པོ་ནི་རང་རང་གི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འཛིན་པར་ཁས་ལེན་པའི་རྒོལ་བ་
དང༌། དེ་སུན་འབྱིན་པར་ཁས་ལེན་པའི་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་བ་དང༌། དེ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་
སྐྱོན་དྲུང་བོར་འབྱེད་པར་ཁས་ལེན་པའི་དཔང་པོ་གསུམ་ངེས་པར་བྱས་ནས་
བརྩད་པར་བྱའོ། དེ་དག་ངེས་པར་མ་བྱས་པར་བབ་ཅོལ་དུ་རྩོད་པ་ནི་མ་ 15
།
།
: 109
E203
，
།



257
абба
D43E
རབས་ཀྱིས་ཤགས་འགྱེད་པ་ལྟར་མཁས་པས་སྨད་པའི་གནས་རྒྱུ་འགྱུར་བས་
རང་རང་གི་བསྟན་པ་འཛིན་ནུས་པ་མཁས་པས་བསྔགས་པའི་འབེལ་གཏམ''
ལ་འཇུག་པར་བྱའོ། | རྒོལ་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་ལ་ཚར་བཅད་པ་དང་རྗེས་སུ་གཟུང་
བའི་གནས་ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་མིན་ཞེ་ན། འདི་ལ་གཞན་གྱི་ལུགས་དགག་པ། རང་
གི་འདོད་པ་བརྗོད་པ། དེ་ལ་རྩོད་པ་སྤང་བ་གསུམ་ལས། དང་པོ་ལ་ དུ
གཉི ས་ཏེ། གངས་ཅན་པའི་ལུགས་དགག་པ་དང༌། རྐང་མིག་པའི་ལུགས་
དགག་པའོ། །དང་པོ་ནི།
རྒོལ་བ་གཉིས་དང་དཔང་པོ་ལ།།
ཚར་བཅད་གནས་ནི་བཅུ་དྲུག་ཟེར།། (TIt 2)
ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་བོད་རྣམས་རྒོལ་བ་ལན་འདེབས་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་ 10
ཚར་བཅད་གསུམ། སྐྱོན་སྤོང་བའི་ སྐབས་སུ་ཚར་བཅད་གསུམ་སྟེ་དྲུག་
དང༌། ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་འདྲི་བའི་སྐབས་སུ་ཚར་བཅད་གསུམ། སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པའི་
སྐབས་སུ་གསུམ་སྟེ་དྲུག་དང་། དབང་པོས་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་
ཚར་བཅད་གསུམ། ཐུན་མོང་དུ་རྣ་མི་གཏོད་པ་'''' ''སྟེ་ཚར་བཅད་བཅུ་
དྲུག་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་ཟེར་རོ། །ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ་འདི༔ མི་བཞེད་དེ། རྩོད་ 15
པའི་རིགས་པར།
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་མི་བརྗོད་ཅིང་།།
སྐྱོན་མི་བརྗོད་པ་གཉིས་པོ་དག །
ཚར་བཅད་པ་ཡི་གནས་མིན་ཏེ།
གཞན་ནི་མི་རིགས་ཕྱིར་མི་འདོད།
ཚེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །རྒོལ་བ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི་གན སཁཅུ་
གཉིས་པོ་དེའང་ཚར་བཅད་ཡིན་ན་རྒོལ་བ་ལ་སྒྲུབ་ པའི་ཡན་ལག་ མི་བརྗོད་
II0



253
25b
BZ 5! །
ཡན་ལག་མ་ཡིན་པ་བརྗོད་པ་གཉིས། ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་ལ་སྐྱོན་མི“བརྗོད་པ་
དང་སྐྱོན་མ་ཡིན་པ་བརྗོད་པ་སྟེ་གཉིས་ལས་བྱེ་བའི་བཞི་པོ་ གང་རུང་དུ་ ་
འདུ་ལ་དེ་དག་ཏུ་མི་འདུ་ན་ཚར་བཅད་ཉིད་མ་ཡིན་ནོ། །དཔང་པོ་ལ་
ཚར་བཅད་མེད་དེ་གཉིས་པོ་དག་ཚར་བཅད་པའི་གནས་ཡིན་ཏེ་ཞེས་ ་ ་༌་ ་
གསུང ས་ལ་གཞུང་གི་ཆ་འགར་ཡང་དེ་མ་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
ལ་ལ་དཔང་པོ་མི་དགོས་ཟེར། །
མཁས་པའི་དཔང་པོས་མ་ཕྱེ་ན།།
རྒོལ་བའི་མཁས་རྨོངས་མི་ ཤེས་ པས།།
རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པར་དགོས་པར་གསུངས།། TIE 3）
མ་ལ་རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་དཔང་པོ་མི་དགོས་ཏེ། རྟོག་གེའི་གཞུང་ 10
ལས་མ་བཤད་པས་སོ་སྙམ་ན། མི་འཐད་དེ་རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པ་ལས།
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཡང་དག་པར་བརྗོད་པའམ། སྐྱོན་ཡང་དག་པར་བརྗོད་པའི་སྒོ་
ནས། རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པར་འགྱུར་ཏེ། དབང་པོས་དངོས་སུ་གོ་
བར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །དེ་ལྟ་ན་དམ་པ་རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བའི་
རྗོད་པའོ་ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །གཉིས་པ་རྐང་མིག་གི་ལུགས་དགག་ \5
D4 4a
]57a
དམ་བཅའ་ལ་གནོད་དམ་བཅའོ ་ གཞན།
དམ་བཅའ་འགལ་དང་དམ་བཅའ་སེལ།།
གཏན་ཚིགས་གཞན་དང་དོན་གཞན་དང༌།l
དོན་མེད་པ་དང་དོན་མི་ཤེས།[ (1IT 4}
དོན་བྲལ་དུས་ལ་མ་བབ་དང༌།།
མ་ཚང་ལྟག་དང་ཡང་བརྗོད་དང་།



༡
རྗེས་སུ་མི་སྨྲ་མི་ཤེས་དང་།
སྤོབས་པ་མེད་དང་རྣམ་གཡེང་དང༌། (TII 5)
འདོད་པ་ཁས་ལེན་བརྒལ་བརྟག་འདོར།།
རྗེས་སུ་སྦྱོར་མེད་ལ་སྦྱོར་དང༌་]]
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཉམས་དང་རྟགས་ལྟར་སྣང་།
ཐུབ་པ་རྐང་མིག་གིས་བཤད་པའིll
ཚར་བཅད་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཉིས་ཡིན| (1II 6）
དེ་ལ་དཔལ་ལྡན་གྲགས་པ་ཡིས།།
འགའ་ཞིག་ཚར་བཅད་མིན་པར་བཤད།
ཚར་བཅད་ཡིན་ན་གཉིས་པོར་སྡུད[ (III 7)
ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་ཉི་ ཤུ་རྩ་གཉིས་པོ་འདི། འགའ་ཞིག་ཚར་
བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་མ་ཡིན་ལ། ཡིན་ན་སྔར་བཤད་པའི་བསྒྲུབ་ པའི་ཡན་ལག་
མི་བརྗོད་པ་ལ་སོགས་པར་འདུ་བར་ལེགས་པར་རིགས་པའི་གཏེར་དུ་ཤེས་་
པར་བྱའོ །
ཕྲད་དང་མ་ཕྲད་གཏན་ཚིགས་དང་།)
རྟག་ ་དང་མ་སྨྲས་མ་སྐྱེས་དང་།
འབྲས་བུ་ཆོས་འཐུན་མི་འཐུན་དང༌།།
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཁྱུད་མེད་དམིགས་པ་དང༌།[ (ITT By
ཐེ་ཚོམ་དོན་གོ་ཐལ་འགྱུར་རྣམས།།
ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་ཡིན་རིགས་བརྟག་ལས།།
འཕེལ་འགྲིབ་བརྗོད་དང་མ་བརྗོད་དང༌
རིགས་པ་དང་ནི་སོ་སོའི་དཔེ། (1TT 2)
36 7b
I?



255
B205
[4 4+E
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་མི་རྟག་རབ་བྱེད་དང༌།
དུས་འདས་མཚུངས་པའི་ལྟག་ཆོད་ནི།།
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི་ཕྱོགས་གླང་གིས་
བཀག་ཕྱིར་གྲགས་པས་བཏང་སྙོམས་མཛད། (TIT 10)
ལྟག་ཆོད་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི་པོ་འདི་དག ཇི་ལྟར་རིགས་པས་འགལ་མ་ 5
ངེས་མ་གྲུབ་གསུམ་དུ་འདུ་ལ་དེར་མི་འདུ་ན་ཚད་མ་ཉིད་དུ་དགོངས་ཏེ།
རྩོད་རིགས་ལས་ཇི་ལྟར་རིགས་པས་གཏན་ཚིགས་ ལྟར་སྣང་བ་དག་གི་ནང་་
དུ་འདུ་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ་ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །ལྟག་ཆོད་འདི་དག་ ཕྱོགས་
ཀྱི་གླང་པོས་རྒྱས་པར་བཀག་པས། རྣམ་འགྲེལ་མཛད་པས་བཏང་སྙོམས་
སུ་མཛད་དོ། །གཉིས་པ་རང་གི་ལུགས་ནི།།
ཚར་བཅད་གཉིས་ལས་ཕྱེ་བའི་བཞི།།
ཉིད་ཡིན་དེ་ལས་གཞན་མི་དགོས། （LII 11)
རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པར།
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་མི་བརྗོད་ཅིང་།
སྐྱོན་མི་བརྗོད་པ་གཉིས་པོ་དག |
ཚར་བཅད་པ་ཡི་གནས་ཡིན་གྱི།
གཞན་ནི་མི་རིགས་ཕྱིར་མི་འ དོད།།
ཅེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །རྒོལ་བ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་མི་བརྗོད་པ་དང་།
ཡན་ལག་མ་ཡིན་པ་བརྗོད་པ་གཉིས། ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་སྐྱོན་མི་ བརྗོད་པ་དང་།
སྐྱོན་མ་ཡིན་པ་བརྗོད་པ་གཉིས་སོ། །འདི་ལྟ་བུ་ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་ཡིན་ 30
གྱི།། གཞན་ནི་ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་མ་ཡིན་པར་དགོངས་སོ།l
ཆོས་དང་འཐུན་པའི་རྩོད་པ་ལ། ལ ་
760a



256
ལོག་རྟོག་བཟློག་ཕྱིར་བརྩད་བྱཱ་མི།།
ཆགས་སྡང་དབང་གིས་རྒྱལ་འདོད་དང༌།
ཕ་རོ ལ་ ཕམ་པ་བསྐྱེད་ཕྱིར་མིན། (III 12y
གང་ཟག་དམ་པ་རང་རང་གི་བསྟན་པ་གཟུང་བར་བྱ་བའི་དོན་དུ་ ་
འཁྲུལ་པ་བཟློག་ཅིང་མ་འཁྲུལ་བའི་དོ ན ་གོ་བར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར།རྒོལ་ཕྱིར་'''' ་དུ
རྒོལ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི། ཆགས་སྡང་གིས་ཀུན་ནས་བསླངས་ཏེ་རང་རྒྱལ་བ་དང་པ་
རོ ལ་ ཕམ་པ་བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཕྱིར་རྩོད་པས་ནི་བསྟན་པ་སྐྱོང་མི་ནུས་ཤིང་ཁྲོ་བ་་
དང་ཁོན་དུ་འཛིན་པར་འགྱུར་བས་དམ་པ་དག་མི་བཞེད་དེ། དབྱིག་
གཉེན་གྱིས།
གང་ ཞིག་རྒྱལ་འདོད་འབའ་ཞིག་གིས།།
རྗོད་སྨྲ་དམ་པ་མ་ཡིན་གྱི།
དེ་ཉིད་སོམ་ཉི་ངེས་པར་བྱེད།།
ཅེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་རྒྱས་པར་གསུངས་སོit
དེས་ན་མཁས་པས་གྲུབ་མཐའི་སྐྱོན།།
གཟུ་བོར་བརྗོད་པས་ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི།།
གང་ཟག་སྐྱོན་དང་བདག་བསྟོད་པ།
547 84 ""15II (III 13)
སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པའི་རྩོད་པ་ནི་རང་གི་གྲུབ་ མཐའ་བསྒྲུབ་པ་དང༌།
གཞན་གྱི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ནོར་བ་རྣམས་སུན་དབྱུང་གི་མ་ནོར་བ་སུན་མི* འབྱིན་'
པ་དང༌། ངམ་པ་དང༌། བདག་ལ་བསྟོད་པ་དང༌། གཞན་ལ་སྨོད་པ་ ༧༠
དང༌། མཚང་འདྲུ་བའི་སྒོ་ནས་གདུང་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ་དང༌། རང་གི་གྲུབ་
མཐའ་འཁྲུལ་མང་ཞེན་པས་ཁས་ལེན་པ་དང༌། གཞན་གྱི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་མ་
D4 ha
B206
3Gdg



157
འཁྲུལ་ཡང་སྡང་བས་ སུན་འབྱིན་པ་དང་། ཅ་ཙོ་དང་། བཞད་གད་དང༌།
གར་དང༌། འདོན་པ་བསྒྱུར་བ་དང༌། ཧ་ ཅང་མྱུར་ཆེས་པ་དང༌། ཆིག་
མཐོ་དམན་དང་། གྲུབ་སུབ་པོ་ལ་སོགས་པས་རྒོལ་བའི་སྤོབས་པ་ཟིལ་
གྱིས་གནོན་པར་འདོད་པ་ནི། སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་མི་བརྗོད་ པའམ། མ་
ཡིན་པ་བརྗོད་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་རང་ཉིད་ཚར་བཅད་དུ་འགྱུར་མོད། གཞན་དུ་
ཕམ་པར་མི་ནུས་ལ། ཆོས་དང་མི་འཐུན་པའི་རྩོད་པ་ངན་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་
པས་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྤང་བར་བྱའོ། །གསུམ་པ་དེ་ལ་རྩོད་པ་ སྤུང་བ་
75 34
བསྟན་པ་བསྲུང་ཕྱིར་དམ་པས་ཀྱང༌། །
གཡོ་སྒྱུས་སྨྲ་བ་འཐད་ཅེ་ན།
གཡོ་སྒྱུས་བསྟན་པ་འཛིན་མི་ནུས།
དེ་འདྲ་ 'རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པར་བཀག། (1T T 14）
མུ་སྟེགས་འགའ་ཞིག་བསྟན་པ་བསྲུང་བའི་ཕྱིར། གཡོ་སྒྱུའི་སྒོ་
ནས་ཀྱང་སྐབས་དེར་ཕ་རོ ལ་མི་སྨྲ་བར་འདུག་ནའང་བདག་རྒྱལ་བ་ཡིན་ ནོ ་
ཞེས་ཟེར་བ་ནི། གཡོ་སྒྱུས་བསྟན་པ་བསྲུང་དགོས་ན། བསྟན་པ་ཉིད་མ་
དག་པར་འགྱུར་ལ། མི་སྨྲ་བར་གྱུར་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས་སྐབས་དོན་འགྲུབ་ན་
མཚོན་དང་མེ་ལ་སོགས་པས་བསྡིགས་པས་མི་སྨྲ་བ་ ཡང་དེར་འགྱུར་བས་
ཧ་ ཅང་གལ་ ལོ། །རྩོད་རིགས་ལས། གཞན་གདུང་བར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར་དམ་
པ་ ་འཇུག་པའམ། བསྟན་བཅོས་བྱེད་པར་མི་འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེས་གསུངས་སོ།།
གཉིས་པ་དངོས་གཞི་ལ།
རྒོལ་བ་རྣམ་གཉིས་རང་རང་གི། །
གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཟུང་ནས་རྩོད་པ་ནི།
།དུ
[4 5E



25g
B207
G69b
སྔོན་གྱི་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ལུགས། (1II 15)
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་དག་མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་དང་རྩོད་པ་ན།
སངས་རྒྱས་པ་དང་གཟེགས་ཟན་ལ་སོགས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཟུང་ནས་རྩོད་་་
ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་འཛིན་མི་ནུས་པ་གང་ཡང་རུང་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད་དང་ གཞུང་""
དུམ་བུར་བཏོན་ནས་སྦྱོར་བ་ཁོད་ཅེས་ཟེར་བ་ནི་བྱིས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ཉམས་་'''
སད་པའི་རྩོད་པ་ཡིན་གྱི། མཁས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འཛིན་པའི་རྩོད་
པ་མ་ཡིན་ནོ། །འདི་ལྟ་བུ་འཆད་པའི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་རྩོད་པར་བཤད་ཀྱི
རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་རྗོད་པར་མི་རུང་སྟེ། གྲུབ་མཐའ་བླང་དོར་མི་ནུས་
པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །གྲུབ་མཐའ་བླང་དོར་གྱི་སྐབས་བཙལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་དེ་ལྟར་
འདྲི་ན་འཇུག་པའི་སྐབས་ཀྱང་སྲིད་དོ།
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་མི་འཛིན་པར།།
རྒོལ་བའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་སུན་འབྱིན་པ།[
རིགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལུགས་འགའ་ལ་སྣང༌།[ (111 16)
དབུ་ མ་པ་འགའ་ཞིག་རང་ ་ ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པར་ རྒོལ་བ་་
ཡོད་མེད་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཇི་ལྟར་ཁས་ལེན་ཡང་སུན་འབྱིན་ཏེ། སློབ་དཔོན་ l5
འཕགས་པས།
གལ་ཏེ་དངོས་གང་དམ་བཅས་ཡོད།
དེས་ན་ང་ལ་སྐྱོན་དེ་ཡོད།།
ང་ལ་དམ་བཅའ་མེད་པས་ན།
ང་ནི་སྐྱོན་མེད་ཁོ་ན་ཡིན།།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ།
གལ་ཏེ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་ལེན་ཡང་
11



259
D4 ба
370a
གཞུང་ནས་བཤད་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཀུན་
རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་བླང་མི་དགོས།
རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ ཉིདll
སྒྲུབ་པ་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ལུགསt (III 17)
དཔེར་ན་ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཚེ།
རྣམ་རིག་གཞུང་གིས་འདིར་མི་གནོད།
དེ་བཞིན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཀུན་ལ་སྦྱར། (1=T 18)
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་བླངས་ནས་རྩོད་ཀྱང་མུ་སྟེགས་་་་
བྱེད་སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་མདོ་སྡེ་པ་ལྟར་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཁས་བླངས་་
ནས་རྩོད་མོད་ཀྱི་ཁྱེད་རང་གི་གཞུང་ལ་སྣང་བ་ སེམས་སུ་བཤད་པ་དང་་་་ !
འགལ་ལོ་ཞེས་བརྗོད་པས་མི་གནོད། དེ་བཞིན་དུ་སེམས་ཙམ་ཁས་ལེན་
པའི་སྐབས་ སུ་ མདོ་ལས་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་གསུངས་པའང་ཁྱེད་རང་གི་དམ་་་
བཅར་འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། དབུ་མ་རྩོད་པ་ན་རྣམ་རིག་ཀྱང་ཁྱེད་
རང་གི་མདོ་ཡིན་པས་དམ་བཅར་འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང༌། དེ་བཞིན་
དུ་མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ནང་ལ་ཡང་བྱེ་བྲག་པ་ལ་གྲངས་ཅན་པས་སྒྲ་མི་རྟག་བR• I5
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་བརྗོད་པ་ན་རང་གི་གཞུང་ལས་སྒྲ་ནམ་མཁའི་ཡོན་ཏན་ཡང་དམ་
བཅར་འགྱུར་བས་དེ་དང་འགལ་བ་ཡང་དམ་བཅའ་དང་འགལ་བ་ཡིན་ནོ་
ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་སྐྱོན་གྱིས་མི་གནོད་དེ། གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་ལེན་དུ་ཟིན་ཡང་།
རང་ཉིད་འདོད་པའི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་དོན་དེ་ཉིད་དམ་བཅར་འགྱུར་ཕྱི་ དགོས་པ་
ཐ་དད་ལ་དགོངས་པའི་དོན་ཐམས་ཅད་དམ་བཅར་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའི་ཕྱིར་་་ t0
རོ། །རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ལས།
ཚད་མས་མ་གྲུབ་དོན་ཅན་གྱིn
B2 08



26]
G70b
D46b
གྲུབ་མཐའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་ངམ་ཙི།
ཞེས་གསྲུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོད།
ལུང་དང་རིགས་པའི་རྩོད་པ་གཉིས།།
ལེགས་པར་ཤེས་ན་མཚུངས་མོད་ཀྱི། །
གཞལ་བྱ་གཉིས་ལ་མངོན་སུམ་དང༌།
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པའི་རིགས་པས་གནོད[ (1II 19?
ལུང་གི་རྩོད་པ་དང་རིགས་པའི་རྩོད་པ་ ་ ་ ་ གཉིས ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་དགག་པ་
དང་སྒྲུབ་པ། རང་རྒྱུད་དང་ཐལ་འགྱུར། གཏན་ཚིགས་དང་བསྒྲུབ་བྱ།
སྒྲ་སྐྱོན་དང་དོན་སྐྱོན་ཐམས་ཅད་རིགས་པའི་རྩོད་པ་ལ་སྐྱོན་ཡོན་དུ་ཇི་ལྟར་
འགྱུར་བ་ལྟར། ལེགས་པར་ཤེས་ན་ལུང་གི་རྩོད་པ་ལ༑ ཡང་ཚུལ་དེ་ཉིད་ in
མཚུངས་པར་འཇུག་གོ །འོན་ཀྱང་ཚད་མ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་མངོན་གྱུར་དང་
ལྐོག་གྱུར་ལ་འཇུག་ལ། སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་གནོད་བྱེད་ཀྱང་མངོན་སུམ་དང་
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པ་ཡིན་གྱི་འདིར་ལུང་མི་འཇུག་གོ །ལུང་གི་ཡུལ་གང་ཡིན་
ཞེ་ན།
གཞལ་བྱ་གསུམ་པ་དཔྱོད་པ་ནི།།
རང་རང་ལུང་དང་འགལ་ན་ག ནོད།
དཔེར་ན་ཆགས་སོགས་སྡིག་པ་དང༌།།
ཆགས་བྲལ་ཆོས་སུ་འཆད་བཞིན་དུ།
ཁྲུས་ཀྱིས་སྡིག་པ་འདག་པ་དང༌།
འ ཚེ་བ་ཆོས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ་བཞིན།། (11T 20]
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར་སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་ཕྱི་དང་ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་དང་མཐོ་རིས་དང་
ངན་སོང་གི་བྱེ་བྲག་ ལ་སོགས་པ་དཔྱོད་པ་ན་ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་དགོས་ཏེ།
ii



261
5
B2 07
ID
གནས་གསུམ་པར་ནི་འཕོ་བ་ན༎
བསྟན་བཅོས་ལེན་པ་རིགས་ལྡན་ཡིན།།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར་གཞི་ཉིད་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ལ་ཁྱད་
པར་གྱི་ཆོས་བདེན་བརྫུན་དུ་ཇི་ལྟར་གྲུབ་ཅེ་ན། དེ་ལྟར་དྲི་བ་རིགས་མོད།
རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་ལན་འདི་ཡིན་ཏེ། སངས་རྒྱུས་པ་དང་རིག་བྱེད་པ་
གཉིས་རྩོད་པ་ན། སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་ཕྱི་དང་ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་སོགས་པ་བདེན་པར་
འདོད་ཅིང་ཆགས་སྡང་རྨོངས་གསུམ་གྱིས་བསྐྱེད་པའི་ལས་སྡིག་པ་དང༌།
མ་ཆགས་པ་དང་ཞེ་སྡང་མེད་པ་དང་གཏི་མུག་མེད་པའི་ལས་དགེ་བར་'''
རྒོལ་བ་གཉིས་ཀ་འཐུན་''༌ལ། སྡིག་པས་འཁོར་བ་དང་སྡིག་པ་ལས་གྲོལ་
ན་ཐར་པ་ཐོབ་པར་རྒོལ་བ་གཉིས་ཀའི་ལུང་འཐུན་མོད། འོན་ཀྱང་ཐབས་
ཀྱི་ལུང་མི་འཐུན་པ་ལ་རྩོད་དེ་རིག་བྱེད་ལས། །
གངྒཱའི་སྒོ་དང་ཀུ་ཤ་འཁྱིལ།།
བིལ་བ་ཅན་དང་སྔོན་པོའི་རི།།
ཀ་ན་ཁ་ ལའི་འཇུག་ངོགས་རྒྱུ།
ཁྲུས་བྱས་ཡང་སྐྱེ་སྲིད་མ་ཡིན།།
ཞེས་འདོན་པ་ནི་ཁོང་རང་གི་ལུང་ནང་འགལ་ཏེ། སྡིག་པའི་རྩ་བ་འདོད་
ཆགས་ལ་སོགས་པ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཡིན་ལ། དེའི་རྩ་བ་སེམས་མི་འཁྲུད་
པར་འབྲེལ་མེད་ཀྱི་ལུས་འཁྲུད་པ་འགལ་ཏེ། རྒྱུ་མཚོའི་སྲོག་ཆགས་གསོད་
པ་ལ་ནགས་ལ་མེ་སྦྱོར་བ་བཞིན་ནོ། །ངེད་ཀྱི་ལུང་ནི་ཕྱོགས་རེ་མགོ་
གནོན་
འདོད་ཆགས་ཤས་ཆེ་མི་གཙང་ཤ་ཚལ་དང༌།
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་ སོགས་པ་དང༌། མཐའ་དག་དཔྱིས་འབྱིན|
G7 1
D47a



262
འདོད་པ་ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ་ནི།།
ཤེས་ཏེ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག་ལས་བྱུང༌།
ཁྱོད་ལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་མི་རྟོག་པས་
དེ་ཕྱིར་ང་ལ་མི་འབྱུང་ངོ་།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར། འཁོར་བའི་ས་བོན་བདག་འཛིན་བཅད་པས་དེས་་ རྒྱ་
བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་འགག དེ་འགགས་པས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལས་གྲོལ་ཏེ་
བུད་ཤིང་ཟད་པས་མེ་རྣལ། དེའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་དུ་བ་མི་འབྱུང་བ་བཞིན་ནོ།།
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་ མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་དགེ་བར་འདོད་བཞིན་དུ། རྒྱལ་རིགས་ལ་ནི་
རྒྱལ་རིགས་གསད། །ཅེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་རང་གི་གཞུང་དང་འགལ་ལ།
སངས་རྒྱས་པས་ནི།
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་བདེ་འགྲོར་འགྲོ།
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་དང༌། །
བསོད་ནམས་མིན་པས་ངན་འགྲོར་འཐེན།
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་རང་གི་ལུང་ཕན་ཚུན་འགལ་བ་མེད་དོ། །སངས་
རྒྱུས་པ་ཉིད་ལའང་མདོ་ཕན་ཚུན་འགལ་བ་མཐོང་ངོ་ཞེ་ན།
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལུགས་ལ། 1:
ཉན་ཐོས་དང་ནི་ཐེག་ཆེན་གཉིས]།
རྣམ་གཞག་ཕལ་ཆེར་མི་མཐུན་པས།།
དེ་དག་ཀྱང་ནི་འགལ་ཞེ་ན། [[1)
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་གཞུང་ལ། ཉན་ཐོས་དང་ཐེག་ཆེན་གཉིས་པོ་ 20
སྤྱིར་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འགལ། བྱེ་བྲག་ཉན་ཐོས་རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་བཞི་ལས་གྱེས་པ་
བཅོ་བརྒྱད་པོ་ལྟ་སྤྱོད་ཕལ་ཆེར་འགལ་བར་སྣང་། ཐེག་ཆེན་ལའང་ས་
G72a
B212
120



263
E!17E
G72
རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དང་གསང་སྔགས་གཉིས་ཕལ་ཆེར་མི་འདྲ་བར་སྣང་ལ།
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ ཕྱིན་པ་ལའང་སེམས་ཙམ་དང་དབུ་ མ་མི་འདྲ་ཞིང༌། གསང་
སྔགས་ལའང་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞིའི་་རྣམ་གཞག་མི་འདྲ་བར་སྣང་བས་ ཁྱེད་རང་་་
གིའང་ལུང་འགལ་བས་ཡིད་བརྟན་དུ་མེད་དོ་ཞེ་ན།
གང་ཟག་གཞུག་པའི་རིམ་པ་དང༌།།
འཆད་ཚུལ་ཤེས་ན་འགལ་བ་མེད།[ (TTL 22）
གང་ཟག་དམན་པ་དང་མཆོག་ལ་མོས་པ་དང་། རང་དོན་དང་གཞན་
དོན་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དང་། ཟབ་པ་དང་རྒྱུ་ཆེ་བ་ལ་དགའ་བ་དང་། དྲུང་
དོན་དང་ངེས་དོན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས་ཐབས་མཁས་པས་བཀྲི་བ་མི་འགལ་ཏེ།
སློབ་དཔོན་འཕགས་པས།
དེ་ཉིད་ཚོལ་ལ་ཐོག་མར་ནི།།
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་ཅེས་བསྟན་པར་བྱ།།
དོན་རྣམས་རྟོགས་ཤིང་ཆགས་མེད་ལ[
ཕྱིས་ནི་རྣམ་པར་དབེན་པ་ཉིད
ཅེས་བྱ་བ་དང༌།
བདག་གོ་ཞེས་ཀྱང་བཏགས་གྱུར་ལ།།
བདག་མེད་ཅེས་ཀྱང་བཏགས་པར་གྱུར།།
སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བདག་དང་ནི།
བདག་མེད་འགའ་མེད་ཅེས་ཀྱང་བསྟན།།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ།
འདི་འདྲའི་རྣམ་གཞག་མི་ཤེས་པ།
འགལ་བར་བསམས་ནས་རྩོད་མོད་ཀྱིl



264
དྷུ་
D4 Ba
(37 32
ལེགས་པར་ཤེས་ན་འགལ་བ་མེད།[ (IIT 23)
གང་ཟག་དབང་པོ་རབ་འབྲིང་དང་། ཁམས་དང་། མོས་པ་དང་།
མཆོག་དམན་གྱི་ རིམ་ པ་ ལ་ དགོངས་ ནས་ ཐེག་ པའི་ རིམ་པ་ མི་ འདྲ་ བ་
གསུང ས་པ་དང༌། གང་ཟག་གི་བསམ་པ་ཐ་དད་མ་དགོངས་ནས་བཤད་
པའི་ཚུལ་ཐ་དད་གསུངས་པ་ལ་བླུན་པོ་དག་ཁུང་འགལ་བར་གེགས་མོད་ཀྱི།
ཐུབ་པའི་དགོངས་པ་མཐའ་དྲུག་ལེགས་པར་ཤེས་ན་འགལ་བ་མེད་དོ་
ཐེག་པ་འགལ་བ་ལྟར་སྣང་བ།
གང་ཟག་རིམ་གྱིས་གཞུག་ཕྱིར་གསུངས།
ཕ་དང་མ་ནི་གཅད་བྱ་སོགས།
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་སོགས་ལ་དགོངས། (11T 2）
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ་སོགས།།
བདག་འཛིན་ཅན་རྣམས་དྲང་ཕྱིར་ཡིན།།
བསད་པས་བྱུང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་པ་སོགས།།
སྒྲ་དེ་བདག་འཛིན་གསོད་ལ་འཇུག ། {TTT 25)
དེ་འདྲའི་འགལ་བས་རྩོད་པ་ལ།།
མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ལན་འདི་གདབ།། (IIT 26）
བར་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་བཅད་དོ།།
ལུང་ལ་རྩོད་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་སུ།
ལུང་གི་དོན་ལ་འདྲི་བའམ།།
མིན་ཡང་ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར་གྱི།
དོན་ལ་འདྲི་བ་འགལ་བ་མེད། (T [T 27）
ལུང་ གི་ ཆོས་ ལ་ རྩོད་ པ་ ན་ སྡེ་ སྣོད་ གསུམ་ གྱི་ དོན་ ཚུལ་ ཁྲིམས་
122



265
དང་ཤེས་རབ་དང་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལས་བརྩམས་ཏེ་འདྲི་བའ ། རྒྱུད་སྡེ་
བཞིའི་དོན་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ་དང་གྲོལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་ལས་ བ༔ མ་ས'ཏེ་འདྲི་
བའམ། མདོ་རྒྱུད་ལས་མ་གསུངས་པ་ལྐོག་གྱུར་གྱི་དོན་སྐྱབས་གནས་
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་ལས་གཞན་དབང་ཕྱུག་ལ་སོགས་པའམ། ལྟ་བ་བཀའ་
རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱུ་ལས་གཞན་བདག་དང་གང་ཟག་ལ་སོགས་པའམ། སྤྱོད་
པ་དབུ་མ་ལས་གཞན་བསོད་ཉམས་དང་ངལ་ཞིང་དུབ་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ལས་་
བརྩམས་ཏེ་འདྲིའམ་མ་རྟོགས་པ་དང་ལོག་རྟོག་དང་ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས་འདྲི་
ན། འདྲི་བར་འོས་པས་བཞད་གད་ཀྱི་གན ས་མ་ཡིན་ནོ། །དེའི་ལན ་ མང་།
མདོ་ལས་ལན་གདབ་རྣམ་བཞིར་གསུངས།།
མགོ་གཅིག་རྣམ་སྦེ་ དྲི་དང་གཞག །
རིམ་བཞིན་འཚོ་དང་སྐྱེ་བ་དང༌།།
བཟང་དང་བདག་གི་ཡོན་ཏན་སོགས།། （ITT 26}
བཅོ མ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་ལན་གདབ་པའི་ཚུལ་བཞི་གསུངས་ཏེ། སྐྱེས་
པ་ཐམས་ ཅད་འཆི་མི་འཆི། ཞེས་འདྲི་ན་ངེས་པར་འཆི་ཞེས་ མགོ་ གཅིག་
ཏུ་ ལན་གདབ། ཤི་བ་ཐམས་ ཅད་སྐྱེ་མི་སྐྱེ་ཞེས་འདྲི་ན་བདག་འཛིན་ ཅན་
སྐྱེ། བདག་འཛིན་མེད་ན་མི་སྐྱེ་ཞེས་རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་ལན་གདབ། མིར་
སྐྱེས་པ་བཟང་ངམ་ཞེས་འདྲི་ན་གང་ལ་ལྟོས་ཞེས་འདྲི། ངན་འགྲོ ལ་ལྟོས་
ན་བཟང་། ལྷ་ལ་ལྟོས་ན་ངན་ཞེས་ལན་གདབ། བདག་རྟག་གམ་མི་རྟག་
ཅེས་འདྲི་ན། བདག་མ་གྲུབ་པས་དེ་ལ་རྟག་པ་དང་མི་རྟག་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་མི་
འགྲུབ་བོ་ཞེས ་གཞག་པར་ ལན་གདབ། མཛོད་ལས།
མགོ་གཅིག་དང་ནི་རྣམ་ཕྱེ་དང༌།།
དྲི་དང་གཞག་པར་ལུང་བསྟན་པ།
16
D4 85
123



266
G74a
E212
，
འཆི་དང་སྐྱེ་དང་ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས།
བདག་གཞན་ལ་སོགས་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར། འདི་འདྲའི་རིགས་ཅན་གྱི་་༌༌༌དྲི་བ་ཀུན་ལ་ལན་གྱི་
རྣམ་གཞག་དེ་ལྟར་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་མདོ་ལས་གསུངས་སོ། །གཞན་ཡང་
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་སེན་རིངས་ཀྱིས་གསོལ་པ། གོའུ་ཏ་མ་བདག་
གིས་ཐམས་ཅད་མི་བཟོད་དོ། །བཀའ་སྩལ་པ། མི་བཟོད་ཅེས་པའི་ཚིག་
དེ་བཟོད་དམ་མི་བཟོད། བཟོད་ན་ཐམས་ཅད་མི་བཟོད་པ་ཉམས་སོ། །མི་
བཟོད་ན་མི་བཟོད་པ་མི་བཟོད་ན་བཟོད་པ་དེ་ཉིད་ཡིན་ཏེ། དགག་པ་བཀག་
པ་སྒྲུབ་པ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ་སྙམ་དུ་དགོངས་སོ། །ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་
བར་གྱུར་ཏོ། ༼མང་བཙོ མ་ལྡན་འདས་ལ་ཟད་བྱེད་པ་དག་གིས་ གསོལ་
ས གོའུ་ཏ་མ་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལ་ མཐའ་ཡོད་དམ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་བཅུ་
བཞི་ཞུས་པ་ལ་ཅང་མི་གསུང་བར་བཞུགས་སོ། །རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ་ལས།
འཇིག་རྟེན་མཐའ་དང་ལྡན་ནམ་ཞེས1|
ཞུས་ན་རྒྱལ་བ་མི་གསུང་བཞུགས།།
གང་ཕྱིར་དེ་ལྟར་ཟབ་པའི་ཆོས།།
་
སྣོད་མིན་འགྲོ་ལ་མི་གསུང་བ།
དེ་ཉིད་ཕྱིར་ན་མཁས་རྣམས་ཀྱིས།།
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པར་གོ་
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། དེས་ན་ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པ་ ནི ་གཞག་པར་ལན་
གདབ་པ་ལས་མ་འདས་སོ།།
ལུང་གི་སྐབས་སུ་འདི་འདྲ་གི།
རྩོད་པའི་ལན་ལ་འགལ་བ་མེདII
མ་།
77 !/
D49a



267
\
རིགས་པ་ལ་ཡང་མི་འགལ་མོདIt : /
འོན་ཀྱང་བླུན་པོས་གོ་བར་དཀའIL （TII 29）
ལུང་གི་སྐབས་སུ་འདི་ལྟ་བུའི་རྩོད་པ་སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པས་འཐད་ལ།
རིགས་པ་ལ་ཡང་འདི་ལྟར་་འཇུག་མོད། འོན་ཀྱང་བླུན་པོས་བདེ་བླག་ཏུ་
གོ་དཀའ་བས་རིགས་པ་ལ་གྲགས་པའི་ལན་གདབ་བོ།
ཡང་ན་ལུང་གི་ ལན་རྣམ་ གཉིས།།
ལུང་ངམ་ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་པ་ཡི།
རིགས་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དེ་བཟློག་བྱl （IT 30) |
མང་ན་ལུང་གི་ཆོས་རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་སུ། སྐབས་དེ་དང་འཚམ་
པའི་ལུང་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ལན་གདབ་པ་དང༌། ལུང་དེ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་རིགས་
པ་ ་གཞན་གྱིས་ལན་གདབ་པའོ།།
ལུང་མང་གང་ལ་རྩོད་པ་ཡི།
།
སྐབས་དང་འབྲེལ་པ་དེ་ལུང་ཡིན།
སྐབས་མིན་རྒོལ་བ་མི་འདོད་པའི
ཁུང་གཞན་འགལ་མང་སྐྱོན་ཆ་ཡིན།། (TTT 31）
དཔེར་ན་ཉན་ཐོས་ཐེག་ཆེན་དང༌
རྣམ་རིག་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་སོགས།
ཕན་ཚུན་འགལ་ཡང་སྐྱོན་མིན་བཞིན!t （11T 32}
ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་ཏེ་ཕན་ཚུན་རྩོད་པ་ན་ཐེག་པའི་རིམ་པ་དང་ལྟ་བའི་
བྱེ་བྲག་དང་སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པ་རང་གི་གཞུང་དུ་ཇི་ལྟར་ཁས་བླངས་པ་དེ་''
ལུང་ཡིན་ཏེ། དཔེར་ན་འདུལ་བ་ཁས་ལེན་པ་ན། རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་བཞི་
རང་རང་གི་ལུང་དུ་ཁས་བླངས་པ་དེ་ལུང་ཡིན་པས་དེ་དང་འགལ་ན་ལུང་་
775a
125



26
B213
[3 14 9b
།
375b
དང་འགལ་བ་ཡིན་གྱི། ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་སྨྲའི་ཁས་བླངས་ནས་གནས་ བརྟན་
པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་སྡེ་པ་གཞན་གྱི་ལུང་དང་འགལ་ཡང་ལུང་དང་འགལ་བར ་ ་ ་
མི་འགྱུར་ལ། གནས་བརྟན་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཁས་བླངས་ནས་ཐམས་ཅད་
ཡོད་སྨྲ་ལ་སོགས་པ་གཞན་དང་འགལ་ཡང་ལུང་གི་སྐྱོན་མ་ཡིན་པ་དང༌།
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་ཉན་ཐོས་ལས་གསེར་དངུལ་ལེན་པ་ལྟང་བར་འགྱུར་ལ་ཐེག་པ་
ཆེན་པོ་ལས་མ་བླངས་པ་ལྟུང་བར་བཤད་པ་དང༌། ཉན་ཐོས་པས་རྣམ་
གསུམ་དག་པའི་ཤ་ ལྟུང་བ་མེད་ལ་ཐེག་ཆེན་པས་ལྟུང་བར་གསུང ས་པ་ ་ ་ ་་་
དང༌། ཉན་ཐོས་ལས་ ཟས་བཅད་པ་དང་མི་སྨྲ་བའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ལྟུང་བར་
གསུངས་པ་ལ། རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འགའ་ཞིག་ལས། སྨྱུང་གནས་དང་ མི་སྨྲ་བའི་
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱིས་གསང་སྔགས་བསྒྲུབ་པར་གསུངས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་སྤྱོད་པ་ in
འགལ་བ་ལྟར་སྣང་བ་ནི་རང་གི་གཞུང་དེ་ཉིད་ལ་གནས་སྐབས་དེ་ཉིད་དུ་་་
སྤྱོད་པ་དེ་དང་བཟློག་སྟེ ་༌༌ སྤྱོད་པར་གསུངས་ན་ལུང་འགལ་བར་འགྱུར་གྱི་
གན ས་སྐབས་ག་དད་དུ་གསུངས་པ་ནི་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབྱེ་བ་ཡིན་པས་མི་འགལ་་
ཏེ་ནད་ཐ་དད་ལ་སྨན་ཐ་དད་གཏོང་བ་བཞིན་ནོ། །དེ་བཞིན་དུ་ ལྟ་བ་
ཡང་ཉན་ཐོས་ལས་རྡུལ་དང་སྐད་ཅིག་གིས་བསྡུས་པའི་གཟུང་འཛིན་དོན་''' 15
དམ་པར་བཤད་ལ། སེམས་ཙམ་པས་སྐྱོང་བ་གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ་དོན་
དམ་པར་གསུངས་ཤིང་། དབུ་མ་པས་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་རང་བཞིན་མེད་
པར་བཞེད་པའི་ལུང་རྣམས་ཕན་ཚུན་འགལ་བར་སྣང་བ་ནི་རང་རང་གི་'''
གྲུབ་ མཐའ་ཁས་ལེན་པའི་ལུང་གིས་གནོད་ན་འགལ་བ་ཡིན་མོད། རང་
རང་གི་གཞུང་དང་མི་འགལ་ན་གཞན་དང་འགལ་བ་སྐྱོན་མེད་དེ་རང་གི་''' an
གྲུབ་མཐར་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཞིང་ལས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ་བཞིན་ནོ། །དེའང་
རང་དང་འགལ་བའི་གཞུང་གཞན་རིགས་པའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་དྲང་དོ ན ་ ནམ་་་"
t26



269
a
L50a
B214
དགོངས་པ་ཅན་དུ་བསྒྲུབས་ནས་རང་གི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ངེས་དོན་ནམ་དྲུང༌་་་་་
པོའི་དགོངས་པར་བསྒྲུབ་ཤེས་ན་འགྱུར་གྱི། དེ་ལྟར་རིགས་པས་བསྒྲུབ་མི་
ཤེས་ན་ལུང་དང་འགལ་བ་ལས་མི་འདའོ།།
རང་འདོད་ལུང་དང་འགལ་གྱུར་ནil :
དེ་ཡི་དགོངས་པ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་བཤད།
གལ་ཏེ་དགོངས་པ་མི་ཤེས་ན།།
ཚར་བཅད་པ་ཡི་གནས་སུ་འགྱུར། (LIT 33)
བསྡུ་བའི་ཚིགས་བཅད་དོ། །ཡང་ན།
རིགས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་རྩོད་པ་ན[1 མོ་
གྲུབ་མཐའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་མི་འབྲང་།།
རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་གསལ་བར་རྗོད། (T11 31）
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་རྩོད་པ་ན། རིགས་པ་དེའང་རང་
རང་གི་བསྟན་པ་ལ་ཕན་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་སངས་རྒྱས་པ་ ་ ་
དང་མུ་སྟེགས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཟུང་ནས་ཕན་ཚུན་རྩོད་པ་ནི་རང་རང་གི་་
བསྟན་པ་གཟུང་བའི་ཕྱིར་ཡིན་ལ། བསྟན་པ་གཟུང་བར་མི་འདོད་ཅིང་ 15
ཕན་ཚུན་ཉམས་སད་པའི་དོན་དུ་བླུན་པོའི་ཁ་ཤགས་ལྟར་བབ་ཅོལ་དུ་རྩོད་
པ་ནི་སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པ་དག་གི་རྩོད་པ་མ་ཡིན་གྱི་གཡོ་སྒྱུ་དག་གིས་བླུན་པོ་ངོ་
མཚར་སྐྱེད་པར་ཟད་དོ། །དེས་ན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་ལེན་མི་ལེན་ངེས་པར་
བྱུས་ལ་ལེན་ན་གཉིས་ཀས་གྲུབ་མཐའི་གཞུང་བཟུང་སྟེ་བརྒྱད་དོ། །
གྲུབ་མཐའི་རྗེས་སུ་མི་འབྲང ་ ་ན!!
དེ་ཡི་རྗོད་གཞི་ངེས་བྱས་པས།།
ཕལ་ཆེར་གྲུབ་མཐའི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ལྟུང་། （IT! 35)
G7+ b
12;



D50b
བླུན་པོ་མཁས་པར་འཆོས་པ་དག་ཁོ་བོས་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་་་
གྱི་རིགས་པས་ཇི་ལྟར་ནུས་པ་ཞིག་འཛིན་ཏོ་ཞེ་ན། དེ་ལ་ ཐོག་མར་རྙེད་
པའི་གཞི་བསྟན་ཏེ། རྩོད་པའི་གཞི་དེ་ཡོད་ པའ མ། མེད་པའམ། རྟག་
པའ མ། ཆད་པའམ། བདེན་པའམ། བརྫུན་པའ མ། འཁོར་བའམ།
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་གང་ཡང་རུང་བ་ཞིག་ལ་འཐད་མི་འཐད་
མ་བྱུང་ན། རྩོད་པའི་ གོ་ སྐབས་ མི་འཇུག་ལ་འཐད་མི་འཐད་ ཅིག་ ལ་ རྩོད་
པ་ན། གང་འཐད་པ་ཁས་ལེན་པ་དེ་ཉིད་གྲུབ་མཐར་འགྱུར་ཏེ། ཡོད་མེད་
འཐད་ན་ཡོད་པའམ་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བའི་གྲུབ་མཐར་འགྱུར་ལ། རྟག་ཆད་
འཐད་ན་རྟག་ཆད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བར་འགྱུར་ཞིང༌། དེ་བཞིན་དུ་བདེན་བརྫུན་དང་
འཁོར་བ་དང་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཡོད་མེད་གང་དུ་ཁས་ ་་༌"
ལེན་ཡང་དེའི་རི གས་ ཅན་གྱི་ཕྱི་ནང་གི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཞིག་གི་ཁོངས་སུ་མི་
ལྟུང་མི་སྲིད་པས་དེ་དག་ལ་བརྗོད་པའི་སྐྱོན་ ཉིད་འཇུག་གོ། །
གྲུབ་མཐའི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་མི་ལྟུང་ན།
དེ་ཡི་ཕྱོགས་སྔ་ངེས་བྱས་པས། །
ཕལ་ཆེར་བླུན་པོའི་རིགས་པར་འགྱུར། （IET 36） |5
ཇི་ལྟར་བརྟགས་ཀྱང་རྩོད་པའི་ སྐབས་ སུ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་ན་
མི་ཤེས་ནས་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའམ་སྐྱོན་བྱུང་གིས་ དོགས་ནས་ཁས་མི་ ལེན་པ་''
ཞིག །དང་པོ་ལྟར་ན་ལེན་ཡང་ཅི་དགོས། བ་ལང་དང་སུ་ཞིག་རྩོད།
གཉིས་པ་ནི་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ཉིད་ཁས་ལེན་ནམ་མི་ལེན། ལེན་ན་ཁས་མི་
ལེན་པའི་དམ་བཅའ་བུད་དེ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ཉིད་ཁས་ བླངས་ པའི་ཕྱིར་མིང་ t0
མེད་དུ་བཏགས་པ་མིང་དུ་སོང་བ་བཞིན་ནོ། །ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ཁས་མི་
ལེན་ན་ཁས་ལེན་པར་འགྱུར་ཏེ། དགག་པ་བཀག་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ་ཡིན་པའི་
[77a
B21$་
1?ནི



1:|:
G? 7b
[251à
ཕྱིར། སྔོན་པོ་མ་ཡིན་པ་མ་ཡིན་ན་སྔོན་པོར་འགྱུར་བ་བཞིན་ནོ
མཁས་ན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འགའ་ཞིག་གི།
རྗེས་སུ་མི་འཇུག་མི་སྲིད་དོ། (IIT 3༩)
རིགས་པ་ལ་བློ་སྦྱངས་པ་དག་དམ་བཅའ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ལ་གཉིས་་་
ཏེ། གཡོ་སྒྱུས་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་དང༌། དྲང་པོས་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའོ། །དང་ རྒྱ
པོ་ནི་གྲངས་ཅན་འདུས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ་གཞན་གྱི་དོ ན ་ཡིན་ཏེ་ཞེས་རང་གི་་་་
དོན་བྱེད་པའི་ཞེ་འདོད་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པར། སྒྱུ་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་མི་འདོད་པའི་
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ཁས་ལེན་པའ མ། ཚུ་རོལ་མཛེས་པ་བ་དག་གཉིས་བཅས་ཀྱི་
སྦྱོར་བ་ལྟ་བུ་འདོད་པ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པར་མི་འདོད་པ་དམ་བཅའ་བ་ནི་སློབ་
དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས་ངན་གཡོའི་ལྟ་བ་ཞེས་གསུང ས་ ལ། གན ས་ མ་བུ་བས་ 10
བདག་རྟག་ ་པ་ དང་མི་རྟོག་པར་བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་དོ་ཞེས་ ཁས་མི་ ལེན་པ་ནི།
སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའི་ལྟ་བ་ཞེས་ལྟ་ལོག་གི་ནང་དུ་བསྡུས་སོ།།
གཉིས་པ་དྲང་པོས་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ནི་ཤེས་ན་དབུ་མའི་ལྟ་བ་ཡང་ དག་སྟེ།
དངོས་པོའི་གནས་ལུགས་སྤྲོས་པ་དང༌བྲལ་བ་ལ་སྒྲ་བློའི་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན་ པས་
ཤེས་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ།
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་པོ་མི་གཟུང་བཞུགས།།
མི་གསུང་བ་ཉིད་རྒྱུ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ།།
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང༌། རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ་ལས། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་གྲངས་ཅན་འུག་ཕྲུག་དང་།།
གོས་མེད་བཅས་ལ་གལ་ཏེ་ ཞིག །
ཡོད་མེད་འདས་པར་སྨྲ་ན་དྲིས།།
དེ་ཕྱིར་སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ནི།།
བསྟན་པ་འཆི་མེད་ཡོད་མེད་ལས།།



272
17 6a
B21
རྒྱ
འདས་པ་ཟབ་མོ་ཞེས་བཤད་པ།
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པ་ལགས་མཁྱེན་མཛོད།།
ཅེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །དེས་ན་མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ཁས་ལེན་ཡོད་བཞིན་དུ་
གཡོ་རྒྱས་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་རྐུན་མ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ལྟ་བུའོ། །དབུ་མ་པ་ཁས་
མི་ལེན་པ་ནི་མ་བརྐུས་བ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པས་ཁྱད་པར་ཆེའོ།
གལ་ཏེ་ཁས་བླངས་གཏན་མི་འདོད།
དེ་ལ་བརྟགས་ན་ ་ ་གཉིས་སུ་འགྱུར།།
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་མི་འདོད་ན།
ཤེས་ན་དབུ་མའི་གྲུབ་མཐར་འགྱུར། (IIT 38）
ཡོད་ཀྱང་ཁས་ལེན་མི་ནུས་ན།
དེ་ནི་ངན་གཡོའི་ལྟ་བར་བཤདl_(III 39)
ཅེས་བྱ་བ་བསྡུ་བའི་ཚིགས་བཅད་དོ།།
ལ་ལ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་མི་འདྲ་བ།།
ཕན་ཚུན་བསྲེས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འདོད།།
སྐྱོན་ཅན་ཡིན་ན་སོ་ སོར་དགག་
སྐྱོན་མེད་ན་ནི་དེ་རྗེས་འབྲང་[ (TIT 40}
ཁ་ཅིག་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཐུན་ ཚོགས་བསྡེབས་
ནས་ཁས་ལེན་ཏེ། དཔེར་ན་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ་དང་མདོ་སྡེ་པ་བསྡེབས་ནས།
ཡུལ་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་དུས་མཉམ་དུ་འཛིན་པར་འདོད་པ་དང༌། མདོ་སྡེ་པ་
དང་རྣམ་རིག་པ་བསྡེབས་ནས་སེམས་ཙ མ་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཁས་བླངས་ཞེས
ཟེར་བ་དང་། མདོ་སྡེ་པ་དང་དབུ་ མ་པ་བསྡེབས་ནས་མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་
དབུ་མ་པ་དང་། སེམས་ཙམ་པ་དང་དབུ་མ་བསྡེབས་ནས་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་
པའི་དབུ་མ་ལ་སོགས་པར་འདོད་པ་ནི་དེ་དག་སྐྱོན་ཡོད་ན་རིགས་པས་སུན་
D5lb
30
37 9b
130



273
དབྱུང་ཞིང༌། སྐྱོན་མེད་ན་གཟུ་བོའི་བློས་བླང་བར་བྱའོ།
མཁས་པས་འཛིན་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ནི
སངས་རྒྱས་པ་དང་མུ་སྟེགས་གཉིས།
དེ་ལས་གཞན་པ་བླུན་པོ་ཡིས།།
གློ་བུར་བརྟགས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཡིན། (141 41） དུ་
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ འཁོར་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཞི་བར་བྱེད་་་་
ཅིང་། འཕགས་པའི་བདེ་བ་་་ལ་འཇོག་པར་བྱེད་པ་མངོན་གྱུར་ལ་མངོན་
སུམ། ལྐོག་གྱུར་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པ་དང༌། ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར་ལ་རིགས་
པས་མི་གནོད་པའི་ལུང་ཁས་ལེན་པ། མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ ལེགས་པར་
བརྟགས་ནས་བཟུང་བ། ལྷ་དང་བཅས་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་བསྟི་གནས་ཡིན་ 0
ནོ། །མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ནི་སྔོན་ཡུན་རིང་པོ་ནས་སྦྱངས་པ། སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་
ཤེས་རབ་ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང་བས་བརྟགས་པ། འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་ལམ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ།
ཚུ་རོལ་མཐོང་བའི་རིགས་པ་དང་མི་རིགས་པ་ཅུང་ཟད་དཔྱོད་ནུས་པ།
མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སུན་དབྱུང་བར་འོས་པ་ཡིན་ནོ། །དེ་ལྟར་འདི་གཉིས་
ནི་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྒྲུབ་པ་དང་སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་ཡུལ་དུ་རུང་བ་ ཡིན''' 15
གྱི། དེ་ལས་གཞན་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ ་གསར་པ་བླུན་པོས་སྦྱར་བ་རིགས་ པས་
སྟོང་བ། ལུང་དང་འགལ་བ། མི་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་གྱིས་འཚོ་བའི་
མོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར་བརྫུན་སྒྱུར་བ། བླུན་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ཆགས་ སྡང་གིས་ རང་
རང་གི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་གཟུང་བ་ཡིན་གྱི། ཁུངས་ནས་མ་བྱུང་བས་དགག་སྒྲུབ་
ཀྱི་འོས་མ་ཡིན་མོད། འོན་ཀྱང་ནོར་བ་ཧ་ ཅང་འཕེལ་ན་ཞིང་གི་མྱུར་མ་ ༧
ལྟར་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་ལ་གནོད་པར་འགྱུར་བས་ལུང་དང་རིགས་པ་
དག་གིས་ཅི་རིགས་པར་སུན་དབྱུང་སྟེ། ཆགས་སྡང་ཅན་གྱི་བླུན་པོས་མི་
གོ་ ཡང་གཟུ་བོར་གནས་པའི་ མཁས་པས་གོ་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ།།
B217།
j79a
E52a
131



27
379b
གངས་ཅན་འདི་ན་དེ་ལས་གཞན།
བླུན་པོའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་མང་མོད་ཀྱི།
དེ་ནི་བླུན་པོས་གོ་སླའི་ཕྱིར།
མཁས་པས་ཕལ་ཆེར་བཏང་སྙོམས་བཞག {TZT 42}
བར་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་བཅད་དོ།
ཆུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ལ་རྟོག་གེ་ལྔ།
རིག་བྱེད་གྲངས་ཅན་འུག་ཕྲུག་བII
ཟད་བྱེད་ཚུ་རོལ་མཛེས་པའོ། (IIT ༥3}
མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་ཀྱང་། རྟོག་གེ་འབར་
བར་བརྒྱར་བསྡུས། དེ་བསྡུ་ན་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲགས་པ་རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་ལྔའོ། །དེ་ ID
དག་ཀྱང་གདོད་མ་ནས་གྲུབ་པའི་རིག་བྱེད་པ། རྙིང་པ་བ། གསང་བར་
སྨྲ་བ་པ། རྒྱལ་དཔོག་པ། དཔྱོད་པ་བ། དྲན་པ་བ་དང༌། ཚངས་པ་ ་ ་ལ་
སོགས་པ་རྣམས་ནི་རྣམ་གྲངས་སོ། །གྲངས་ཅན་པ། སེར་སྐྱ་པ། རང་སྐྱེ་
བ། སུམ་ཅུ་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ནི་རྣམ་གྲངས་སོ། །གསལ་བྱེད་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་
ནི་སྐབས་ཀྱིས་རིག་བྱེད་པ་དང་གྲདྨ་ཅན་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་གྲགས་པ་ཡོད་དོL 16
འུག་ཕྲུག་པ། གཟེགས་ཟན་པ། བྱེ་བྲག་པ། རིགས་པ་ཅན། ཚིག་གི་
དོན་དྲུག་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ནི་རྣམ་གྲངས་སོ། |ཟད་བྱེད་པ། རྒྱལ་བ་དམ་
པ་བ། ཚིག་གི་དོན་དགུ་བ། སྲོག་གི་སྡེ་ཚན་པ། འཛེམ་མེད་པ། །
གཅེར་བུ་བ། ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གོས་ཅན། ནམ་མཁའི་གོས་ཅན་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་
སོགས་པ་ནི་རྣམ་གྲངས་སོ། །དེ་ལྟར་སྡེ་བཞི་པོ་ནི་ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་བདེན་ 30
པར་འདོད་པས་རྟག་པར་སྨྲ་བ་ཞེས་ཟེར་རོ། །ཚུ་རོལ་མཛེས་པ་བ།།
འཇིག་རྟེན་རྒྱང་་་པན་པ། ཆད་པར་ལྟ་བ་པ། མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ་པ། ཕུར་
ཀྱི 19
* 12



d89a
བུ་བ། ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གྱུར་ཟླ་བ་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ནི་རྣམ་གྲངས་སོ། །བོད་
འགའ་ཞིག་འཇིག་རྟེན་སྔ་ཕྱི་མི་འདོད་པས་རྒྱུང་པ་ན་བའོ་ཞེས་ཟེར་བ་་་་་
རྒྱང་་་ཕན་པའི་ཟླ་དོན་མ་ཤེས་པར་ཟད་ལ་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་མ་གྲགས་་་
པས་གྱི་ནའོ། །རྒྱལ་རིགས་གཞུང་དུ་སྨྲ་བ་ལ་སོགས་བའང་འདི་ལ་བརྟེན་
ཏེ་བྱུང་ངོ༌། །འདི་དག་ནི་ ་ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་ པས་ཆད་
པར་ཟླ་བ་ཞེས་ཟེར་རོ།།དེ་ལྟར་ན་རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་ལྔ་པོ་དེའང་རྟག་ཆད་གཉིས་
ཅུ་འདུས་སོ།
སྔ་མ་གསུམ་པོ་རིག་བྱེད་འཛིན། །
ཕྱི་མ་རྣམ་གཉིས་རིག་བྱེད་འདོར།
།
1:|: : བདག་ཡོད་པར་ནི་ཐམས་ཅད་༢ཐུནIL 21:|: 1: 10
ལྟ་བའི་བྱེ་བྲག་གཞན་མི་འདྲ[ { trT 14)
དེ་ལྟར་རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་ལྔ་སྔ་མ་གསུམ་ནི་རིག་བྱེད་པ། གྲངས་ ཅན་པ།
འུག་ཕྲུག་པ་རྣམས་ནི་རིག་བྱེད་ཚད་མར་བྱེད་ལ། འོན་ཀྱང་རིག་བྱེད་པ་
དང་གྲངས་ཅན་པ་གཉིས་ནི་རིག་བྱེད་མ་བྱས་པ་རང་བྱུང་ཡིན་པས་ ཚངས་
པས་དྲན་ནས་གདོང་བཞི་ནས་བཏོན་ཏོ་ཞེས་ཟེར་རོ། །གཟེགས་ཟན་པ་ 15
ནི་དབང་ཕྱུག་གིས་བྱས་པར་འདོད་དོ། །དེ་ལྟར་ན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་གསུམ་པོ་
དེ་ཚངས་པ་དང་། དབང་ཕྱུག་དང༌། ཁྱབ་འཇུག་ལ་ལྟར་བྱེད་ལ། འོན་
ཀྱང་གང་ལ་མི་དམ་དུ་བྱེད་པ་དེའི་མིང་ཐོབ་སྟེ། ཚངས་པ་བ་དང༌།
དབང་ཕྱུག་པ་དང༌། ཁྱབ་འཇུག་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་མིང་དུ་
གྲགས་ཏེ། སངས་རྒྱས་པ་ཡི་དམ་ཐ་དད་སྒོམ་པ་ལ་དེའི་མིང་དུ་གྲགས་པ་ 20
བཞིན་ནོ། །འོ་ན་གསུམ་ཀ་རིག་བྱེད་ལ་ཚད་མར་བྱེད་ན་རིག་བྱེད་པ་
ཉིད་དུ་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་མི་འཇོག་ཅེ་ན། བདེན་ཏེ་འོན་ཀྱང་རིག་བྱེད་པ་ནི་རིག་
G80t



[553
B21ཤུ་
Gila
བྱེད་ཉིད་ལ་གཙོར་བྱེད་ལ། གྲངས་ཅན་དང་གཟེགས་ཟན་པ་ནི་རིག་བྱེད་
འཆད་པའི་དྲང་སྲོང་ལ་གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད་པའི་ཕྱིར་དེ་དང་དེའི་མིང་གིས་་
བཏགས་ཏེ། སངས་རྒྱས་པ་སྤྱིར་མདོ་ལ་ཚད་མར་བྱེད་ཀྱང་མདོ་སྡེ་པ་
འབའ་ཞིག་གིས་དེའི་མིང་ཐོབ་ལ་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་ བ་དང༌ སེམས་ཙམ་པ་དང་
དབུ་མ་པ་ལ་རྒྱུ་མཚན་གཞན་གྱིས་མིང་དུ་བཏགས་པ་བཞིན་ནོ། །ཚུ་
སྟེགས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པར་འཐུན་ཏེ། རྟག་སྨྲ་བ་རྣམས་
བདག་རྟག་པར་འདོད་ལ། ཆད་སྨྲ་བ་ནི་བདག་ཡོད་པ་ཆད་པར་འདོད་
པས་སོ། །སློབ་དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས་མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ་གང་ཇི་
སྙེད་ ་ ་ཡོད་པ་དེ་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ་ལས་གྱུར་ཏོ་ཞེས ་ ་ ་ ་་༌"
གསུངས་པའང་དེ་ལ་དགོངས་པའོ། །གྲུབ་མཐའི་བྱེ་བྲག་གཞན་ལས་རྒྱུ་ la
འབྲས་དང་ལམ་དང་འབྲས་བུའི་རྣམ་གཞག་མི་འདྲ་བར་སྣང་ངོ་། །
བོད་ཀྱི་རྟོག་གེ་པ་རྣམས་ ནི།།
འདི་ཡི་རྣམ་གཞག་འཁྲུགས་པ་མང་།
དེ་ཕྱིར་དེ་དག་གིས་སྤེལ་བའི།།
བསྟན་བཅོས་བདེན་པར་གཟུང་མི་བྱ། (TZT W5)
བོད་ཀྱི་དགེ་བཤེས་འགའ་ཞིག་གིས ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ སྦྱར་བའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་མང་
པོ་སྣང་མོད། དེ་དག་གཞུང་ལུགས་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣམ་གཞག་མ་གཟིགས་པར་
ཕན་ཚུན་སུན་ཕྱུང་བ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་རྟོག་གེ་ཐ་དད་དུ་བཞག་ལ། གྲུབ་
མཐའ་འཐུན་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་ གཅིག་ ཏུ་ ་ ་ ་ ་
བཞག་པ་ནི་རྣམ་པར་འཁྱམས་པ་ཡིན་ཏེ། དཔེར་ན་ཉན་ཐོས་དང་ཐེག་ B0
ཆེན་དང་། བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ་དང༌། མདོ་སྡེ་པ་དང་། སེམས་ཙམ་པ་
དང་། དབུ་མ་པ་ཕན་ཚུན་སུན་འབྱིན་ཡང་ཐ་དད་དུ་མི་འཇོག་པར་སངས་
134



277
343
35 3b
མན་
རྒྱས་པ་ཞེས་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྡུད་ལ། རིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མཐའ་པ་འགའ་དང་ཟད་བྱེད་
པ་དང་སེམས་ཙམ་པ་དག་ཀྱང་སེམས་སུ་བྱེད་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འགའ་ཞིག་་
འཐུན་པ་དང་། དཔྱོད་པ་བ་དང༌། རྒྱུང་༌༌པན་པ་དང་། དབུ་མ་ཐལ་
འགྱུར་བ་འགའ་ཞིག་ཡོད་པ་སུན་འབྱིན་པ་དང༌། གཞན་ལ ་ ་ གྲགས་པའི་
རྗེས་དཔག་དང་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ལ་སོགས་པ་མིང་བཤུན་ཡང་དོན་མི་འདྲ་བས་དུ་
རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་ཐ་དད་དུ་འཇོག་པ་བཞིན་ནོ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་པ་ལ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞིl
བྱེ་བྲག་སྒྲ་དང་མདོ་སྡེ་པ་ ག ཞུང་
རྣམ་རིག་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་སྨྲ།
འདི་དག་གི་ ་ནི་དབྱེ་བ་ལ།།
གྲུབ་མཐའི་དབྱེ་བ་ཅི་རིགས་ཡོད། །
རྒྱུས་པར་གྲུབ་མཐའ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ལྟོས། （1 T! f?
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལ་ཉན་ཐོས་དང་ཐེག་ཆེན་གཉིས། ཉན་
ཐོས་པ་ལ་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ་དང༌། མདོ་སྡེ་པ་གཉིས། ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་
སེམས་ཙམ་དབུ་མ་གཉིས། སེམས་ཙམ་ལ་རྣམ་བཅས་རྣམ་མེད་གཉིས། །
དབུ་མ་ལ་རང་རྒྱུད་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གཉིས་སོ། །དེ་དག་ནང་གསེས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ་
རྣམས་ནི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་དུ་བལྟ་བར་བྱའོ། །
དེ་དག་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་ལེན་ན།།
ཐོག་མར་རྩོད་གཞི་ངེས་པར་བྱ།
མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་དང་ཉན་ཐོས་རྣམས་
ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་འདོད་དེ་དག་དང༌།
རྩོད་ན་ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་ཁས་བླང་།[ （TT7 47}
B2 2]
135



178
GB2
1:| མིན་ན་རྩོད་གཞི་མི་འཐུན་པ། །
རྩོད་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་འཇུག་པ་དཀའn (LIT + 8）
རྒོལ་བ་གཉིས་རང་རང་གི་བསྟན་པ་གཟུང་བའི་ཕྱིར་གྲུབ་མཐའ་
བདེན་བརྫུན་བཤད་པའི་སྐབས་རྒྱུ། ཉན་ཐོས་དང་ཆུ་སྟེགས་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་
དོན་བདེན་པར་ཁས་ལེན་པ་དེ་དག་དང་རྩོད་ན། དབང་ཤེས་རྟོག་བྲལ་མ་ 。
སོགས་པར་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་ཁུལ་བེམས་པོ་ཉིད་བཀག་ན་ ་སྐབས་ ་ ་
དོན་གྱི་རྩོད་པ་འགྱངས་པར་འགྱུར་བས་མདོ་སྡེ་པའི་ལུགས་བཟུང་སྟེ་དོན་གྱི་
མཐུས་སྐྱེས་ ་༌་ ་ ་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་བཀོད་ནས་རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་བདེ་བླག་ཏུ་
འགྲུབ་པར་དགོངས་སོ། །བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་མདོ་སྡེ་རྣམས་ལས་
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཞལ་གྱིས་བཞེས་ཏེ། རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ལས།
དེས་དེ་ཉིད་དོན་བཏང་སྙོམས་ཅན
གླང་ཆེན་གཟིགས་སྟངས་ཉིད་མཛད་ནས།།
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐུགས་ནི་འབའ་ཞིག་གིས། །
ཕྱི་རོལ་དཔྱོད་ལ་འཇུག་པ་མཛད། །
ཅེས་གསུང ས་སོ། །དེའི་དགོངས་པ་བསྐང་བའི་ཕྱིར་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པས 15
གལ་ཏེ་ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་ལ་འཇུག་པ་ནི།
ཁོ་བོས་མདོ་སྡེའི་སྐབས་ལ་རྣམ་པར་བརྟེནt
ཞེས་གསུངས་པར་གྲག་གོ། །ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་རྩོད་པའི་མལ་
ག་རྣམས་ཆོད་ནས་དེའི་རྩ་བ་བཅད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
གང་གླི་དངོས་པོ་རྣམ་དཔྱད་པ།
དེ་ཉིད་དུ་ན་དེ་དངོས་མེད།
གང་གི་ཕྱིར་ན་དེ་དག་ལ།།
D542
G42b
136



27
B221
གཅིག་དང་དུ་མའི་རང་བཞིན་མེདIL
ཚེས་གཅིག་དང་དུ་བྲལ་གྱིས་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ་བཀག་པའི་ཚེ་ དེའི་རྟགས་
མ་གྲུབ་བོ་སྙམ་ན།དྲུག་གིས་ཅིག་ཅར་སྦྱར་བའི་རིགས་པས་བསྒྲུབས་ནས་ཕྱི་
རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཁེགས་པ་ན། མདོ་སྡེ་པའི་སྐྱེས་ལ་འདྲ་བ་ཡང་མི་འགྲུབ་སྟེ།
དོན་དངོས་མེད་པའི་སྣང་ཅན་་དེས༎
ཇི་ལྟར་དོན་འཛིན་ཞེ་ན་བདེན།l
ངས་ཀྱང་དེ་འདྲ་མི་ཤེས་སོ
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །སྐབས་འདིར་གཅིག་དང་དུ་
བྲལ་ནི་སེམས་ཙམ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ་ཡིན་གྱི། དབུ་མའི་ལུགས་སུ་འདོད་པ་
ནི་གཞུང་གི་སྐབས་དོན་མ་ལོངས་པར་ཟད་དོ། །འོ་ན་སྣང་བ་འདི་དབང་
ཕྱུག་ལ་སོགས་པས་ནི་མ་བྱས། རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཁེགས་པས་རྒྱུ་མེད་ ལས་སྐྱེ་བར་
འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེ་ན། མི་འགལ་ཏེ་ས་བཅུ་པ་ལས། ཀྱེ་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་དག་
ཁམས་གསུམ་པོ་འདི་དག་ནི་སེམས་ཙམ་མོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང༌། ལང་ཀར་
གཤེགས་པ་ལས།
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱིས་ནི་དཀྲུགས་པའི་སེམས།།
དོན་དུ་སྣང་བ་རབ་ཏུ་འབྱུང༌
དོན་ཡོད་མ་ཡིན་སེམས་ཉིད་དེ།
ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་མཐོང་ལོག་པ་ཡིན
ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་དོན་རིགས་པས་བསྒྲུབ་ན་ལྷན་ཅིག་དམིགས་ངེས་ལ་སོཊ
པས་གཟུང་ན་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་གཞན་ཡིན་པ་ཁེགས་སོ། །དེ་ལྟར་ཕྱི་རོ ལ་ 0
གྱི་དོན་ཁེགས་པས་གཟུང་བར་སྣང་བ་མི་འཐད་དོ་ སྣུམ་ན ག ཟུང་ཆ་
ཁེགས་པས་དེ་འཛིན་ཉིད་ཀྱང་ཁེགས་ཏེ། །
ge 3
137



10
ན
།
གཟུང་བ་མེད་པས་དེར་འཛིན་མེད
ཅེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །དེས་ན་མྱོང་བ་ནི་རང་རིག་གིས་འགྲུབ།
གཟུང་འཛིན་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་རིགས་པས་ཁེགས་ པས་གཉིས་མེད་
ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ་ཉིད་འགྲུབ་སྟེ།
བློ་ཡིས་ཉམས་མྱོང་བྱ་གཞན་མེད།
དེ་ཡི་མྱོང་བ་གཞན་ཡོད་མིནit
གཟུང་དང་འཛིན་པ་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
དེ་ནི་དེ་ལྟར་རང་ཉིད་གསལ།།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །དེས་ན་རྟོགས་པ་དང་མ་རྟོགས་པའི་དབང་
གིས་འཁྲུལ་མ་འཁྲུལ་ལས་འཁོར་བ་དང་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་གཞི་འདི'' !
ཉིད་ཡིན་པར་དགོངས་སོ། །དེས་ན་ཀུན་ཏུ་ཐ་སྙད་པའི་གཞི་རྣམ་རིག་
303bབསྒྲུབས་ནས། ཐ་སྙད་ལས་འདས་པ་དོན་དམ་པ་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་ལང་
ཀར་གཤེགས་པ་ལས།།
སེམས་ཙམ་ལས་ནི་བཟླས་ནས་ཀྱང༌། །
སྣང་བ་མེད་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་སྒྱུར།
ཞེས་གསུངས་ཤིང་། རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ལས།
འདུ་བྱེད་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལ་དགོངས་ནས།།
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བསྒོམ་པར་གསུངས་པ་ཡིན༎
ངེད་ཀྱི་དེ་ནི་རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེས།།
དེ་ཡང་བདག་མེད་ལྟ་རྟེན་ཡིན། །
ཞེས་གསུངས་ལ། རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་པ་ལས། །
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་དངོས་ལ་ཡང༌།



B2 22
D°jja
གང་གིས་སྐྱེ་ཟར་རྣམ་བརྟགས་པI
རྣམ་པར་མི་མཁས་དེ་ཡིས་ནི། །
རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་དེ་མ་མཐོང༌
ཞེས་གསུངས་པས། གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ་ཉིད་གཞན་དབང་སྐད་ཅིག་མ་
རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་ཡིན་ལ། རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་ཉིད་སྐྱེ་མེད་ཡིན་པས། དོན་དམ་ རྒྱ
པར་སྐྱེ་མེད་སྤྲོས་བྲལ་གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྒྱུ་མཚོས་ཞུས་པ་ལས།
གང་ཞིག་རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ་དེ་མ་སྐྱེསIl
དེ་ལ་སྐྱེ་བའི་རང་བཞིན་ཡོད་མ་ཡིན༎
རྐྱེན་ལ་རག་ལས་གང་དེ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིདl
གང་གིས་སྟོང་ཉིད་ཤེས་དེ་བག་ཡོད་མིན།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །དེས་ན་རྣམ་རིག་ལེགས་པར་རྟོགས་ན་དབུ་
མའི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པར་འགྱུར་རོ། །ཞེས་
རྣམ་འགྲེལ་མཛད་པའི་དགོངས་པ་དེ་ཡིན་ནོ༎
ཕྱི་རོལ་དཔྱོད་ན་མདོ་སྡེ་པའི།།
གྲུབ་མཐའ་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན།།
དེ་ཕྱིར་མཁས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི།།
གཞུང་ལུགས་ཐམས་ཅད་དེ་ལྟར་ཡོད༎ (TIL ༥9)
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ལ་འཇུག་ན་མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འཕྲོད་པ་འདུ་བའི ་་༌"
འབྲེལ་པས་ཡུལ་རིག་པ་དང༌། བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བའི་ཡུལ་དང་དབང་པོ་
དུས་མཉམ་བས༔ ཡུལ་རིག་པར་འདོད་པ་ལ་གནོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ་ཡོད་ པས་ gl
མི་འཐད་ཅིང༌། མདོ་ལས། མིག་ལ་བརྟེན་ཅིང་གཟུགས་ལ་དམིགས་ནས་
མིག་གི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ་སྐྱེ་ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་དོན་མདོ་སྡེ་བས་ ཡུལ་ ་ ་
Gs4a



282
G845
དབང་པོ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་རྐྱེན་བཞི་ལས་རྣམ་ཤེས་སྐྱེ་བར་་་་༌
འདོད་པ་ལ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཡོད་ཅིང་གནོད་བྱེད་མེད་པས་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་་
ཞུགས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ་ཡིན་ནོ། །དེས་ན་སློབ་དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་སྐུ་མཆེད་
ཕྱོགས་གླང་ཆོས་གྲགས་ལ་སོགས་པ་མཁས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱིས་ ལུང་དང་་་༌
རིགས་པའི་རྣམ་གཞག་མདོ་སྡེ་པ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་མཛད་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་དེ་་་ རྒྱ
ཡིན་ནོ
འདི་ལ་སེམས་ཙམ་ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་
ཁས་བླངས་ཡིན་ཞེས་བོད་རྣམས་སྒྲོགས།
རྟག་དངོས་བཞིན་ཏེ་འདི་མི་སྲིད
མདོ་སྡེ་པ་ལ་བཏགས་པར་ཟདl (II 1 52）
བོད་རྣམས་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་ལ་སོགས་པ་མངོན་པ་གོང་མའི་བསྟན་་
བཅོས་རྣམས་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་དང་སེམས་གཉིས་ཞལ་གྱིས་བཞེས་པའི་གཞུང་
ལུགས་འདི་དག་སེམས་ཙམ་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཁས་བླངས་པ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས''''
འདོད་པ་མི་འཐད་དེ། སེམས་ཙམ་ཡིན་ན་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཁས་ལེན་པར་
འགལ། ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་ཁས་ལེན་ན་སེམས་ཙམ་དུ་འགལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
དཔེར་ན་རྟག་དངོ ས་ཁས་ལེན་པ་བཞིན་ཏེ་རྟག་པ་ཡིན་ན་དངོས་པོར་མི'''
འཐད། དངོས་པོ་ཡིན་ན་རྟག་པར་མི་འཐད་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །དེས་ན་མདོ་
སྡེ་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལེགས་པར་མ་ཤེས་པའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བབ་ཅོལ་དུ་ སེམས་
ཙ མ་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཁས་བླངས་ཞེས་བརྗོད་པར་ཟད་དོ།།
ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་རྣམས་འགོག་པ་ན།།
རྣམ་རིག་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ ཡིནl
ཆོས་ཉིད་གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་པ་ན། །
355t་
E223



2B3
G9 ; 3
དབུ་མའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་དངོས་སྟོབས་ཡིན། ( 111 52}
དེས་ན་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་འགོག་པའི་དུས་སུ་སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་གཅིག་་་
དང་དུ་བྲལ་དང༌། ལྷན་ཅིག་དམིགས་ངེས་དང་། རིག་''པའི་ གཏན་
ཚིགས་དང༌། ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་དོན་གཅིག་སྣང་བ་ཐ་དད་ལ་སོགས་ པའི་
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཐམས་ཅད་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ལ། ཆོས་ཉིད་གཏན་ལ་
འབེབས་པ་ན་དབུ་མ་རང༌ རྒྱུད་པའི་ རྡོ་ རྗེ་གཟེགས་མ་དང་། མུ་བཞི་སྐྱེ་
འགོག་ལ་སོགས་པ་དང༌། ཐལ་འགྱུར་བའི་བསྒྲུབ་བྱཱ་དང་ མཚུངས་པ་དང་།
རྒྱུ་མཚན་མཚུངས་པ་ལ་ སོགས་པ་དངོས་པོའི་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ ནོ
ཁ་ཅིག་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཁས་ལེན་ན།།
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་མེད་ ཅེས་ཟེར།
མ་ཡིན་དངོས་པོའི་སྟོབས་མེད་ན།།
རིགས་པའི་དགག་སྒྲུབ་ཇི་ལྟར་འཐད། （LII 52)
བོད་ཁ་ཅིག་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་རང་འདོད་པའི་ ཆགས་ སྡང་་
གི་སྒོ་ན ས་མུན་སྤྲུལ་སྨྲ་བར་ཟད་ཀྱི། ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལ་
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་མེད་དོ་ཞེས་ཟེར་བ་མི་འཐད་དེ། །སངས་རྒྱས་ 5
བཅོ མ་ལྡན་འདས་དང་འཕགས་པའི་གང་ཟག་དང་མཁས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་
ལ་སྐུར་པ་བཏབ་པར་འགྱུར་ཏེ། ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ནི་དེ་དག་
གི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །དེས་ན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལ་རང་རང་གི་སྐབས་
སུ་འཇུག་པའི་དངོས་པོའི་སྟོབས་མེད་ན་སྐབས་དེ་ལ་ལྟོས་པའི་ དགག་སྒྲུབ་
མི་ནུས་ཏེ། དཔེར་ན་ལས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ་ཐ་དུད་པའི་གང་ཟག་ལ་ཆུ་དང་མེ་ 0
ལ་སོགས་པར་སྣང་ན་ངོམས་པ་དང་སྲེག་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་་་
མཉིད་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ལ། ཡི་དགས་ལ༸སོགས་པ་ལས་མི་
GE5E
L55
B??
141



24
འཐུན་པ་གཞན་ལ་ཆུ་ལ་སོགས་པ་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་མ་ཡིན་གྱི།
རང་རང་གི་སྣང་བ་གང་ཡིན་པ་དེ་ཉིད་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ནོ
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་དངོས་པོ་ཁས་ལེན་ན་བྱས་ཡོད་ཀྱིས་མི་རྟག་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ་དངོས་
པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་གྱི། དབུ་མ་པ་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་རང་བཞིན་མེད་
པས་དངོས་པོ་ཉིད་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ལ་དེའི་ཆོས་ཡོད་པའམ་མེད་པ་ཁས་མི་ལེན་ རྒྱུ
པས་བྱས་ཡོད་ཀྱིས་མི་རྟག་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ག་ལ་ཡིན།
ཡུམ་ལས་ཤཱ་རིའི་བུ་སེམས་མེད་པ་ལ་ཡོད་པའམ་མེད་པར་ལྟ་དམིགས་
སུ་ཡོད་དམ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། སྡུད་པ་ལས།
མི་རྟག་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྟན་པ་བཅོས་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ་སྟེ།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ།།དེ་བཞིན་དུ་འབྲས་བུ་དང་མི་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས་
ཀྱང་སྣང་བ་དང་གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཐ་དད་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་
ཉིད་ཐ་དད་པར་འགྱུར་ལ། ཡང་ཚུ་རོལ་མཐོང་བས་དབང་པོ་ལྔ་ ཡུལ་
སོ་སོ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ལ། ཕ་རོལ་གཟིགས་པའི་
སངས་རྒྱས་ལ་དབང་པོ་ལྔ་ཡུལ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་འཇུག་ སྟེ། མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་
ལས།
དབང་པོ་ལྔ་རྣམས་གཞན་གྱུར་ན།
དོན་ཀུན་འཇུག་དང་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི།
ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་གཉིས་འབྱུང༌།
འབྱོར་པ་དམ་པ་ཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར།
ཞེས་གསུང ས་པ་ཉིད་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་པས། ལས་དང་གང་
ཟག་གི་དབྱེ་བས་ དངོ ས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ཐ་དད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་གང་་་་
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་མ་ཡིན་དཔྱོད་ཅིག གལ་ཏེ་ཀུན་རྫོབ་དང་
$6b།



25
GB6b
5225
དོན་དམ་པའི་རྣམ་གཞག་མི་འདྲ་བས། དོན་དམ་པ་སྤྲོས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བས་
ཤེས་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་ལ། ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཤེས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ཡིན་པས་དེ་ལ་
དངོ ས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱིས་དགག་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དོ་སྙམ་ན། དེ་ལྟ་ན་ཀུན་
རྫོབ་ཉིད་ཡོད་པ་དང་མེད་པ་དང་རྟག་པ་དང་མི་རྟག་པ་དང༌། བེམས་པོ་
དང་རིག་པ་དང་གཟུང་བ་དང་འཛིན་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་འཐད་མི་ འཐད་ཁས་
ལེན་པ་ལ། མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་དང་ སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའི་རིམ་པ་རྣམས་
འཇུག་ལ། དེ་དག་ཀྱང་མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་བདག་རྟག་པ་ཡུལ་ལ་ ལོངས་སྤྱོད་
པ་ཞིག་ཁས་ལེན་ན་ཁོང་རང་གི་རིགས་པ་དེ་ལས་འོས་མེད་ལ། དེ་བཞིན་
དུ་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ་དབང་པོ་དང་ཡུལ་དུས་མཉམ་པས་འཛིན་པ་དང་། །
མདོ་སྡེ་པས་རྐྱེན་བཞི་ལས་ཡུལ་འཛིན་གྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས་སྐྱེ་བ་དང༌། སེམས་ \u
ཙ མ་པས»སྐྱོང་བ་གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་ སྣང་བ་
དང༌། དབུ་མ་པ་རང་བཞིན་མེད་པ་ལ། རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ་བཞེད་པ་
ནི། རང་རང་གི་ལུགས་ཁས་ལེན་པ་ལ་རང་རང་གི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ་དེ་
ཉིད་སྐབས་ དེ་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས་སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པའི་རིགས་པ་དེ་ཉིད་ སྐབས་དེའི་
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བར་དགོངས་ཏེ། ཕན་ཚུན་འཆོལ་ 15
བའི་རིགས་པ་རྣམ་པར་འཁྱམ་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །དཔེར་ན་ཡུལ་དུས་ཐ་
དད་ཀྱི་སོ་ནམ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་བྱ་བ་ལ་རང་རང་གི་ལུགས་ཀྱིས་འགྲུབ་ཀྱི་
ཕན་ཚུན་འ ཆོལ་ན་མི་འགྲུབ་པ་བཞིན་ནོ། །བཅོ མ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་
བསམ་པའི་བྱེ་བྲག་གིས་སྡེ་སྣོད་ཐ་དད་དུ་གསུངས་པའང་དེ་ལ་ དགོང ས་ ་
སོ། །གལ་ཏེ་གྲུབ་ མཐའ་ཐ་དད་ལ་རང་རང་གི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ་དེ་ལས་མི་ 30
འདའ་ མོད། མཁས་པ་དག་གིས་རིགས་པས་དཔྱད་ན་འཇིག་ པས་འཁྲུལ་
ལ་གང་མི་འཇིག་པ་དེ་དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ སྣུམ་ན། དེ་ལྟར་ན་
87
D57
143



2B6
797b
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ་ཉིད་བརྗོད་པ་མི་སྲིད་དེ། བློའི་ཡུལ་
དུ་གང་གྲུབ་པ་དེ་ལ་བརྟགས་ན་སྐྱོན་འཇུག་པའི་ཕྱིར། མི་སྨྲ་བ་ལས་འོས་
མེད་དེ། ལིཙ་བུའི་མདོ་ལས།
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་པོ་མི་གསུང་བཞུགས།།
མི་གསུང་བ་ཉིད་རྒྱ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ།[
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ལས།
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་ལྟར་རྣམ་དཔྱད་པ།1
་
དེ་ལྟ་དེ་ལྟར་རྣམ་་་བྲལ”ཞེསI།
མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་གང་གསུངས་པ།
དེ་ནི་དངོས་སྟོབས་ འོངས་པ་ཡིན།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པས། དངོས་པོ༌སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་རིགས་པས་དཔྱད་ན་གང
ཡང་མི་འགྲུབ་པས་མཐར་ལིཙ་བྱིའི་རྣམ་ཐར་ལ་འཇུག་པར་བྱའོ།།
རིགས་པ་ལ་ཡང་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས།།
གཞན་སྡེ་ཆུ་སྟེགས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ལུགས།།
ཚད་མ་གཅིག་དང་མང་པོ་དང༌།
དེ་དག་སོ་སོའི་མཚན་ཉིད་དང༌༎
དབྱེ་བསྡུའི་བྱེ་བྲག་མང་མོད་ཀྱི།
འཁྲུལ་པར་གྲགས་པས་འདིར་མ་བཤད། （ITT 53)
རིགས་པའི་རྣམ་གཞག་ལ་ཡང་རང་སྡེ ་ སངས་རྒྱས་པ་དང་གཞན་སྡེ་མུ ་༌༌"
སྟེགས་བྱེད་གཉིས་ལས། སངས་རྒྱས་པ་སྔ་རབས་པ་ནི་ མངོན་སུམ་རྗེས་ au
དཔག་ལུང་ཚད་མ་དང་གསུམ་བཞེད་ལ། ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ་ནི་རིགས་པ་
དང་འགལ་བའི་ལུང་ཚད་མ་ཉིད་མ་ཡིན་པས། རིགས་པས་མི་གནོད་ཅིང་
E226
1



287
5?b
ga da
ལུང་ཕན་ཚུན་མི་འགལ་ན་ཚད་མ་ཡིན་མོད་ཀྱི་དེ་རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ཁོངས་སུ་
འདུ་པར་བཞེད་དེ། རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ལས།
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཚིག་ནི་མི་བསླུ་བའི། །
སྤྱི་ལས་འདི་ཚུལ་ལྐོག་གྱུར་ནའང་།
གོ་སྐབས་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར་བློ་ནི།
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པའི་ཚད་མར་བཞེད།
ཅེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །མུ་སྟེགས་ཚད་མ་གཅིག་
དང༌། གསུམ་དང༌། བཞི་དང༌། ལྔ་དང༌། དྲུག་ལ་
སོགས་པ་འདོད་པ་ཡོད་མོད་ཀྱི་འདི་དག་འཁྲུལ་པར་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་གྲགས་་
པས་འདིར་མ་སྤྲོས་སོ། །
རང་སྡེ་སངས་རྒྱུས་ཚད་མར་འཛིན།།
དེ་ལ་སྔ་ཕྱི་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས།
སྔ་ མ་དབྱིག་གཉེན་ལེགས་ལྡན་སོགས།།
དོན་ལ་འཁྲུལ་པ་མེད་མོད་ཀྱི།
དབྱེ་བསྡུའི་ཁྱད་པར་འགའ་ཞིག་དང༌ll
བརྗོད་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་ཁྱད་པར་ཡོད། (TIT 4 ）
སྔ་རབས་པའི་མཁས་པ་དེ་དག་དོན་ལ་འཁྲུལ་པ་མེད་མོད། འོན་
ཀྱང་ཚོད་མའི་གྲངས་དང་ནང་གསེས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བསྡུ་དང་བརྗོད་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་་
ཁྱད་པར་ཡོད་དེ་མངོན་སུམ་དང་རྗེས་དཔག་དང་ལུང་གི་ཚད་མ་གསུམ''''
བཞེད་པ་དང་། སློབ་དཔོན་དབྱིག་གཉེན་རྩོད་པ་གྲུབ་པར་ལྟག་ཆོད་
གསུམ་དུ་བསྡུད་པ་དང་། སྒྲུབ་པའི་ངག་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ་ལྡན་དུ་ མ ཛད་པའི་
ལུགས་འཛིན་ཏོ།།
w
15



288
36 3t
B227 །
ཕྱི་མ་ཕྱོགས་གླང་ཆོས་གྲགས་ སོགས།]
གྲངས་དང་དབྱེ་བསྡུའི་བྱེ་བྲག་དང༌།།
བརྗོད་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་ཉུང་རྒྱུས་སོགས།།
སྔ་མའི་ཚུལ་ལས་ ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས།། (E It 55）
ཕྱི་རབས་ཀྱི་མཁས་པ་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཚད་ མའི་ དུ་
གྲངས་གཉིས་སུ་ངེས་ལ། ལུང ནི ་རིགས་པ་དང་འགལ་ན་ཚད་མ་མ་ཡིན་
ཞིང་། མི་འགལ་ ན་རྗེས་དཔག་ཏུ་སྡུད་པ་དང་། དབྱེ་བསྡུ་ཨང་ཁྱད་
པར་བྱ་བྱེད་ལ་སོགས་པའི་འབྲེལ་པ་རྣམས་བདག་གཅིག་དེ་བྱུང་དུ་སྡུད་པ་
དང༌། ལྟག་ཆོད་གསུམ་དུ་མི་འདུ་སྟེ། མདོ་ལས།
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་དང་མི་ བདེན་དང༌། །
འགལ་ཉིད་ལྟག་ཆོད་རྣམས་ལ ནི།
རྩོད་པ་གྲུབ་པར་ཚུལ་ག སུམ་བཤད!!
འདི་ལ་ཁྱད་པར་མཚོན་པ་མེད༎
ཅེས་གསུང ས་པས་སོ། །རྩོད་པའི་ངག་འགོད་ཚུལ་ཡང་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ་ལྡན་
དཔེར་ན''ལ་ལ་ མེ་ཡོད་དེ་དུ་བ་ཡོད་པའི་ ཕྱིར་ཚང་མང་བཞིན། ལ*ལ་ 15
ཡང་དུ་བ་ཡོད་པས་མེ་ཡོད་ ཅེ ས་འདོད་པ་མི་འཐད་དེ། སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་བརྗོད་པ་
མ་ཚང་། དམ་བཅའ་དང་ཉེར་སྦྱར་དང་མཇུག་སྡུད་ ག སུམ་ལྟག་པའི་ཕྱིར་
རོ། །དེས་ན་ རྩོད་པའི་ངག་ཉུང་རྒྱུས་ ཞེས་བྲུ་བ་ཁྱབ་པ་དང་། ཕྱོགས་
ཆོས་བརྗོད་པ་ཡན་ལག་གཉིས་ལྡན་དུ་སྦྱོར་བས་ ཕྱི་རབས་པའི་ རྟོག་གེ་ཁྱད་
པར་དུ་འཕགས་སོ། །ཕྱི་རབས་ ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་ 30
གང་ཟག་རྣམས་ལ་ཡང་།
རྩོད་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ མ ཐོང༌།།
D58a



2B9
C393
རྒྱ་
ཆོས་གྲགས་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ངག་བཀོད་ནས།།
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཚེར་མ་འབྱིན་པར་མཛད།།
གཞན་དུ་ཚར་བཅད་གནས་སུ་བཞེད། {111 56 ）
རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པ་ལས་ཇི་ལྟར་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར། རྩོད་པའི་
སྐབས་གང་ཡིན་པའི་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ངག་སྐྱོན་མེད་བཀོད་ནས་ཚེར་མ་འདི་ལྟར་་
འབྱིན་ཏེ། རྟགས་འདི་མ་གྲུབ་པ་མ་ཡིན་ཏེ་ཆོས་ཅན་ལ་མཐོང་བའི་
ཕྱིར་རོ། །འགལ་བ་མ་ཡི ན་ཏེ་འཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ལ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །མ་
ངེས་པ་མ་ཡིན་ཏེ་མི་འཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཁེགས་པའི་ ཕྱིར་རོ། །ཞེས་དེ་ལྟ་
བུའི་ཚུལ་གྱི་ཚེར་མ་གསུམ་མི་འབྱིན་པའི་རྒོལ་བ་དེ་ཚར་བཅད་པའི་གནས་
ཡིན་ཞིང༌། ཚེར་མ་ཕྱུང་བའི་རྗེས་ལ་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྱི་སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་ངག་
འཇུག་པར་གསུངས་སོ།
ཕྱི་མའི་རིགས་པར་སྨྲ་བ་འགའ|
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་བརྗོད་ལ་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྱིས།།
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་ནས་ནི་ཚེར་མ་འབྱིན།།
བོད་རྣམས་དེ་དང་འཐུན་པར་རྩོདll 《TI1 57）
བི་ཀྲ་མ་ཤི་ལའི་མཁས་པ་ཞིག་དང་བྷ་ག་ལའི་བྲམ་ཟེ་ཞིག་རྒྱལ་པོ་
སྒྲ་ཚད་ཤེས་པ་ཞིག་གིས་དཔང་པོ་བྱས་ཏེ་རྩོད་པ་ནི། བྲམ་ཟེས་རིག་བྱེད་
ཀྱི་སྒྲ་རྟག་པར་འདོད་པ་ལ། སངས་ རྒྱས་ པས་མི་རྟག་ཅེས་དམ་བཅས།
བྲམ་ཟེས་མི་རྟག་སྟེ་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེས་དྲིས། སངས་རྒྱས་པས་གང་ཡོད་པ་མི་
རྟག་སྟེ་བུམ་པ་བཞིན་སྒྲ་ཡང་ཡོད་དོ་ཞེས་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ངག་བཀོད། དེ་ལ་
བྲམ་ཟེས་རྟགས་དེའི་ཚེར་མ་མ་ཕྱུང་ངོ་ཞེས་བཤུང་ཞིང་རྒྱལ་བོ་ལ་བལྟས།
རྒྱལ་པོ་དཔང་པོ་ཡི ན་པས་སངས་རྒྱས་པ་ལ་རྟགས་དེའི་ཚེར་མ་ཕྱུང་ཤིག་་་་
D58b
3 3D
B2 23
0
17



20
ཅེས་སྨྲས། པདྡྷི་ཏས་ཁོ་བོའི་རྟགས་སྐྱོན་མེད་པ་ལ་ཚེར་མ་དབྱུང་ཙི་དགོས་
ཞེས་ལན་བཏབ། དེར་བྲམ་ཟེས་ཚེར་མ་འབྱིན་དགོས་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་མ་
ཤེས་པས་སྤོབས་པ་མེད་པར་འདུག་གོ །དེ་མན་ཆད་རྒོལ་བ་ཕལ་ཆེར་
དེའི་རྣམ་ཐར་བཟུང་ནས་རྟགས་ལ་ཆེར་མ་མི་འབྱིན་པ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་
གཞག་བྱེད་པ་མང་ངོ་ཞེས་གྲག་གོ །རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པའི་རྣམ་གཞག་
མི་ཤེས་པའི་བོད་ཀྱི་རྟོག་གེ་བ་རྣམས་ཀྱང༌། རྟོགས་ལ་ཚེ ར་མ་མི་འབྱིན་པར་
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྱི་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་རྩོད་པ་འབའ་ཞིག་ཏུ་མཐོང ་ ་ ་ ་ ་
39 (Ja
15
ཚུལ་འདི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ་ཡི།
བཞེད་པ་མིན་ཕྱིར་འཐད་པ་དཀའ། (III 58）
རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པར་རྟགས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ་ལ་ཚེར་མ་མ་ཕྱུང་ན་རྒོལ་བ་ཐམ་ ་ ་
པའི་གནས་སུ་གསུངས་པས། ཚེར་མི་ཕྱུང་སྟེ་བརྩད་དོ། །གཞན་དུ་ན་
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པའི་དགོངས་པ་དང་འགལ་བར་འགྱུར་རོ།།
འདི་འདྲའི་རྩོད་པ་སྡེ་བདུན་དང༌།
རིགས་པའི་གཏེར་དུ་ཤེས་པར་གྱིས།[ (T 11 59）
རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ལ་སོགས་པ་རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་སྡེ་བདུན་དུ་རྒྱུས་ པར ་ ་ ་ ་
གསུངས་ཤིང་། སྡེ་བདུན་གྱི་དོན་བསྡུས་པ་ཁོ་བོས་བྱས་པའི་རིགས་པའི་
གཏེར་དུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ༎
འདིར་ནི་གསར་བུ་རྟོགས་སླ་བའི།།
རྣམ་པར་གཞག་པ་ཅུང་ཟད་བཤད| (11T 6}
སྐབས་འདིར་རྩོད་པ་གསར་བུ་དག་གིས་གོ་སླ་བར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར་་
འདྲི་བ་དང་ལན་འདེབས་པའི་ཚུལ་ཅུང་ཟད་བཤད་དེ། 1:|:
El
pདེ
།
14



291
G905
32 2q
འདི་ན་སྐབས་རྒྱུ་བབ་པ་དྲི།
ཅིག་ཅར་རྣམ་གྲངས་མང་བ་མིན།། (ET T 62 )
མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་དག་རྒོལ་བས་ཕྱོགས་སྔ་མ་མི་འདྲ་བའི རྒྱུད་ཆགས་་༌
བརྒྱ་དང་ཉིས་བརྒྱ་ལ་སོགས། ངག་རྒྱུན་གཅིག་ལ་བཏོན་ནས། དེ་ཕྱིར་
རྒོལ་གྱི་གོ་རིམས་མ་འཁྲུགས་པར་ཕྱོགས་ལྟར་རྗེས་སུ་བརྗོད་དེ། དེ་ནས་ དུ
གོ་རིམས་ཕྱོགས་ཕྱི་མས་སུན་འབྱིན་ལ། དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཕྱོགས་ལྔ་བརྗོད་མ་
ནུས་ན་རྗེས་སུ་མི་བརྗོད་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཚར་བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་སུ་འགྱུར་རོ་
ཞེས་ཟེར་རོ། །རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པར་སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པའི་ཕྱོགས་རྡ་རེ་རེ་ནས་
སུན་བྱུང་བས་ཆོག་མོད། སྐབས་སུ་མ་བབ་པའི་ཕྱོགས་སྔ་རྗེས་སུ་བརྗོད་
པ་ནི་སྐབ་པ་དང་། རྒྱུན་འབྱིན་གྱི་མན་ལག་མ་ཡིན་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ཚར་
བཅད་དུ་དགོངས་སོ། །དེས་ན་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྱིས་འདྲི་བ་ན་ཡང་ན་རྟག་ ་ ་
གམ་ ་་མི་རྟག་ཅེས་བྱ་བ་ལྟ་བུ་སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པའི་རྩོད་གཞི་དྲ་བར''''
བྱའི། རང་བྱུང་ཡིན་ནམ་སྐྱེས་བུས་བྱས་པ་ཡིན་ནམ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་
པ་མང་པོ་དྲི་བར་མི་བྱ་སྟེ། སྔ་མ་མ་ངེས་པར་ཕྱི་མ་རྩོད་པ་ངག་སྐྱོན་
ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །ཆུ་སྟེགས་འགའ་ཞིག་ན་རེ་དྲི་བ་ལ་ཕྱོགས་ {5
སྔ་མ་མང་པོ་སྐྱེལ་ 'ནས་དེ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་རྒོལ་བས་འཛིན་མི་ནུས་པས'''
རིམ་པ་བཞིན་རྗེས་སུ་བརྗོད་པ་དང་སུན་འབྱིན་པ་འཁྲུག་ཅིང་འཁྲུལ་པར་
འགྱུར་ལ་དེ་ལྟ་ན་སྤོབས་པ་མེད་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཚར་ བཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་སུ་
བཏང་བའི་ཐབས་ཡིན་ནོ་སྙམ་ན། དེ་ལྟ་བུ་སྒྱུ་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་ཚར་བཅད་
ཀྱང་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འཛིན་མི་ནུས་པས་དམ་པའི་རྩོད་པ་མ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་རྩོད་ 20
རིགས་ལས་འབྱུང་ངོ་།
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་གཅིག་ལ་རྟགས་མང་པོ། །
[
]ཀཱ
།
l?



D59
འཇུག་ཀྱང་རྩོད་ན་མང་པོ་མིན།།
སྔ་མ་རྟགས་མིན་ཚར་བཅད་གནས།
རྟགས་ཡིན་ཕྱི་མ་ཚར་བཅད་འགྱུར། （ITE 62）
སྒྲ་མི་རྟག་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་ཡོད་པ་དང་བྱས་པ་དང་རྩོལ་བྱུང་ལ་སོགས་
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྟགས་ མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་གང་རུང་ཞིག་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་གཞན་མང་པོ་ རྒྱ་
མི་བརྗོད་དེ། སྔ་མ་རྟགས་མ་ཡིན་ན་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པ་བརྗོད་པས་ཚར་
བཅད་ཡིན་ལ། སྔ་མ་རྟགས་ཡིན་ན་ཕྱི་མ་ལྷག་པ་བརྗོད་པས་ཚར་བཅད་
ཡིན་ཏེ་དམ་བཅའ་བརྗོད་པ་བཞིན་ནོ། །
ཆོས་ཅན་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ལ་སོགས།
གཏན་ཚིགས་དྲིས་ པས་འགྲུབ་པར་གསལ།[ （TII 63)
རི་བོང་གི་རྭའམ་བདག་ཆོས་ ཅ ན་ ་
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཆོས་ཅན་མི་སྲིད་པའམ། ཤ་ཟའི་བུམ་པའམ།
འདོད་ཆགས་དང་བྲལ་བ་ཆོས་ཅན་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པ་སྲིད་ཀྱང་ཚད་ ་ ་
མས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ཆོས་ཅན་དུ་འཇོག་པའམ། ཡིད་ཀྱི་མངོན་སུམ་མམ།
ལྟོས་མེད་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཆོས་ཅན་ཚད་མས་གྲུབ་ཀྱང་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་བརྗོད་ན་རྩོད་ །
པའི་གཞི་འཚུགས་ཀྱིས་དོགས་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་ཆོས་ཅན་མ་གྲུབ་ཅེས་ཟེར་ན་་
འདི་ལྟར་བརྗོད་དེ། མ་གྲུབ་པ་དེ་ཙི་ཚིག་ཙམ་ཡིན་ནམ་དེ་ལ་གཏན་
ཆགས་ཡོད། ཚིག་ཙམ་གྱིས་མ་གྲུབ་པར་འགྱུར་ན་ཁོ་བོས་ཀྱང་གྲུབ་ཅེས་
བརྗོད་པས་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་མི་འགྲུབ། རྟགས་ཡོད་དོ་ཞེ་ན་རྟགས་དེ་ཁོད་ཅིག
གལ་ཏེ་དེས་རྟགས་བཀོད་ན་རི་བོང་གི་རྭ་དང་ ཤ་ཟའི་བུམ་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ" au
ཆོས་ཅན་དུ་མ་བཞག་ན་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྱིའང་ཆོས་ ཅན་མི་འགྲུབ་ལ། བཞག་ན་
རྒོལ་བའི་ མང་ཆོས་ ཅན་གྲུབ་པ་དེ་ཉིད་ཡིན་ནོ། །དེ་བཞིན་དུ་རྩོད་པ་
E2 30
0215
150



293
D60а
G92a
གཞན་ལ་ཅི་རིགས་པར་སྦྱར་ཏེ་ ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ།།
དབུ་མ་བ་དག་སྟོང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས[1
བརྩད་ན་་གཞན་གྱི་ལན་རྣམས་ཀུན།|
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་དག་དང་མཚུངས་པ་ཡི།།
མ་གྲུབ་པ་ཞེས་སློབ་དཔོན་བཞེད། (1IL 64 )
དབུ་མ་པས་དངོས་པོར་སྨྲ་བ་རྣམས་ལ་དབང་ཕྱུག་གམ་བེམས་་་།
པོའམ་རྣམ་རིག་ལ་སོགས་པ་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རིགས་པས་བཀག་
པ་ན། དབང་ཕྱུག་པ་དབྱིབས་ལ་སོགས་པའི་བཀོད་པས་བྱེད་པ་པོ་དབང་
ཕྱུག་སྒྲུབ་པ་དང་། ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱིས་རྡུལ་དང་སེམས་ཙམ་པས་རྣམ་རིག་གི་
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་བཀོད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་མ་གྲུབ་པ་བཞིན་དུ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱང་་ t
མ་གྲུབ་ལ། དེ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་གཞན་བཀོད་ཀྱང་དེ་དང་འདྲ་སྟེ་ སློབ་
དཔོན་གྱིས།
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་བརྗོད་བྱས་ན།།
གང་ཞིག་ལན་ལྡོན་སྨྲ་བྱེད་པ། །
དེ་ཡི་ཐམས་ཅད་ལན་གདབ་མིན།།
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱུ་དང་མཚུངས་ཕྱིར་རོ།།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ། །དེ་བཞིན་དུ་རྒྱུ་མཚན་མཚུངས་པའི་མགོ་སྙོམས་
ལ་སོགས་པ་ལའང་སྦྱར་ཏེ་ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ།།
བོད་རྣམས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་ལན་ལ་གསུམ།།
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་དང༌།
མང་ན་འདོད་པས་ལན་འདེབས་སོ།། (TIT $5）
བོད་ རྣམས་ ཐལ་ འགྱུར་གྱི་ ལན་ ལ་ གསུམ་ སྟེ། ཕྱོགས་ ཆོས་མེད་
151



294
ན་ གཏན་ ཚོགས་ མ་ གྲུབ་ པ། འགལ་ བའམ་མ་ངེས་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་
ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་པ། ཁས་བླངས་པ་དང་འཐུན་ན་འདོད་བས་ལན་འདེབས་
E 31
དེ་ལྟ་ན་ནི་ཐལ་འགྱུར་སྐྱོན།
ཐམས་ ཅད་མ་གྲུབ་གཅིག་པུར་འགྱུར།
དེ་འདྲ་སྡེ་བདུན་ལས་མ་བཤད། （1 TT 66)
གཏན་ཚིགས་སྐྱོན་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་མ་གྲུབ་བོ་ཞེས་ནིའིཕྱིར་མི་་ •
བརྗོད། གལ་ཏེ་དོན་ལ་མ་གྲུབ་པར་འདུ་མོད། འོན་ཀྱང་གཏན་ཚིགས་མ་
གྲུབ་པ་ནི་ཕྱོགས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་ཡིན་ལ། ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ནི་ཁྱབ་པའི་སྐྱོན་
ཡིན་པས། གཏན་ཚིགས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་དང་ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་པ་གཉིས་སུ་འགྱུར་ in
རོ་ཞེ་ན། དེ་ལྟ་ན་འགལ་བ་དང་མ་ངེས་པ་གཉིས་ཀའང་ཁྱབ་པའི་སྐྱོན་
ཡིན་ཡང༌། འགལ་བ་ནི་འཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ལ་གཏན་མི་འཇུག་ལ། མ་ངེས་པ་
ནི་མི་འཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ལའང་འཇུག་པས་འགལ་བ་དང་མ་ངེས་པ་ ་བརྗོད་་་༌
པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གཉིས་ སུ་ ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་མི་འགྱུར། དེས་ན་མ་གྲུབ་པར་སྡུད་ན་
གཅིག་ཏུ་འགྱུར་ལ། དགོས་པ་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས་འབྱེད་ན་གསུམ་དུ་འགྱུར་རོ། ། 15
དེའི་ཕྱིར་སྡེ་བདུན་ལས་རྩོད་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ་དང། འགལ་བ་དང༌།
མ་ངེས་པ་ཞེས་སྐྱོན་གསུམ་གསུངས་ཀྱི། ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ ་གཅིག་ཏུ་
མ་བསྡུས་ཏེ།
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་ནི་ཚུལ་གསུམ་ལའང་།
འདི་ཡིས་མ་གྲུབ་བཟློག་དོན་དང༌།།
འཁྲུལ་པ་ཅན་གྱི་གཉེན་པོར་ནི།
ངེས་པ་བརྗོད་པར་མཛད་པ་ཡིན།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ།
D600
ན
།
152



295
1
(193a
འགལ་བའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར་བརྗོད་པ་ལ།
།
།
ལ།
ཡོད་ཀྱང་མིན་ན་ཅི་ལྟོ་ཞེས།།
སྡུད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཚིག་ཕྲད་ཀྱི།།
ནུས་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་འགྱུར། ( 11T 67)
བྱས་པའི་ཕྱིར་ ་་རྟག་པར་གལ''་དུ་
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། དུ་བ་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར་མེ་མེད་པར་ཐལ་ཙེས་འགལ་བའི་
ཐལ་་བ་ ་ ་བརྗོད་པ་ལ། བྱས་ཀྱང་མི་རྟག་ན་ཅི་འགལ་ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་
ཅེའམ། དུ་བ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་མེ་ཡོད་ན་ཅི་འགལ་ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ་ཅེས་བརྗོད་
དགོས་ལ། དེ་ལྟ་ན་ཀྱང་གི་སྒྲ་སྡུད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཚིག་ཕྲད་ཡིན་པས།
བྱས་པ་རྟག་པ་དང་མི་རྟག་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་འཇུག་ཀྱང་འདིར་མི་རྟག་པ་ ་་་
ཡིན་ཞེས་བྱ་བའམ། དུ་བ་མེ་ཡོད་མེད་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་འཇུག་ཀྱང་། འདིར་
མེ་ཡོད་པའི་དུ་བ་ཡིན་པ་ཅི་འགལ་ཞེས། དུ་བ་མེ ་མེད་ལ་ཡང་འཇུག་
པ་ཡོད་དོ་ཞེས་སྡུད་པའི་ཚིག་ཕྲད་དུ་འགྱུར་ཏེ། དཔེར་ན་ཤེས་བྱ་ཡིན་
པའི་ཕྱིར་རྟག་པར་ཐལ་ ཅེས་བརྗོད་པ་ན་ཤེས་བུ་ཡིན་ཡང་མི་རྟག་ན་ཙི་་༌་་་
འགལ་ཞེས་བརྗོད་དགོས་ལ་དེ་ལྟ་ན། མང་གི་སྒྲས་ ཤེས་བྱ་ལ་རྟག་མི་རྟག་ 16
གཉིས་སྡུད་པའི་ཕྲད་དུ་འགྱུར་བ་བཞིན་ནོ། །དེས་ན་འདི་ལྟ་བུའི་བརྗོད་
ཚུལ་མཐའ་དག་སྒྲ་མི་ཤེས་པའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་ཚིག་གི་ནུས་པ་ངོས་མ་ཟིན་་་་
པའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཡིན་ནོ། །འོ་ན་ཁྱེད་རང་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལན་ཇི་ལྟར་་་༌༌
འདེབས་ ཤེ་ན།
འདིར་ ནི་མ་གྲུབ་འགལ་མ་ངེས།།
གསུམ་ཡིན་མིན་ན་འདོད་པ་གྲུབ།
དེ་དག་མིན་ན་ཡང་དག་གི་
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་བཟློག་མི་ནུས།1 (IIT 68） 15
B2 32
G93b །
Dla



296
ཁོ་བོ་ཅག་སྒྲ་ མིག་གིས་གཟུང་བྱ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཅེས་བརྗོད་ན་གཏན་
ཚིགས་མ་གྲུབ་པའམ། དུ་བ་ཡོད་པཱ་མེ་མེད་པར་ཐལ་ཅེས་ཟེར་ན་འགལ་བ་
དང༌། གཞལ་བྱ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་རྟག་པར་ཐལ་ ཅེས་ཟེར་ན་མ་ངེས་པ་དང་།
བྱས་པས་མི་རྟག་པར་ཐལ་ ཅེས་ཟེར་ན་འདོད་པ་དང་། བྱས་པ་རྟག་པར་
འདོད་པ་ལ་བྱས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རྟག་པར་ཐལ་ཅེས་བརྗོད་ན་ཡང་དག་ཡིན་པས'' དུ
བཟློག་པར་མི་ནུས་སོ།།
དེ་ལྟར་ཆོས་དང་འཐུན་པ་ཡི།།
རྩོད་པ་བསྟན་པ་འཕེལ་བའི་རྒྱུ།
དམ་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བསྔགས་པའི་ཕྱིར།།
མཁས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོས་ལེགས་པར་སྦྱར། (IIT 69)
བསྟན་པ་དག་པར་རྟོགས་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར། དོན་དང་སྒྲ་སྐྱོན་
མེད་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་སྒྲུབ་པ་དང་སུན་འབྱིན་པ་བསྟན་པ་འཕེལ་བའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་ ་ ་ ་
པས། དམ་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཏམ་སྦྱར་བར་བྱའོ།
གསུམ་པ་མཇུག་ཚོགས་པས་གཟུང་བདེ་བའི་ཕྱིར་ངག་བསྡུས་ཏེ་'''
བརྡ་སྤྲད་པ་ནི།
དེ་ལྟར་ལེགས་པར་གཏན་ཕབ་ནས།།
དཔང་པོས་འཛིན་དུ་གཞུག་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
རྩོད་པའི་ངག་རྣམས་བསྡུས་ཏེ་བསྒྲུགས།།
འདི་ནི་མཁས་པའི་གཞུང་ལུགས་ཡིན།། (I11 70)
དེ་ལྟར་རྗོད་པའི་དངོས་གཞི་ལ་བརྒལ་ p
ལན ་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས་དགག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་གན ས་གྲུབ་པས་གྲུབ་མཐའི་བླང་དོར་རྟོགས་་
པར་བྱས་ནས་ངག་ཅུང་ཟད་འ ཐོར་བ་རྣམས་ཚོགས་པས་གོ་སླ་བར་བྱ་བའི་
ཕྱིར། བསྡུས་ཏེ་བརྗོད་པར་བྱའོ།།
15
G94a



E61b
B2 33
294E
གལ་ཏེ་ཚོགས་པ་བླུན་པོ་འམ།།
ཆགས་སྡང་སྒོ་ནས་མི་འཛིན་ན།
གནས་དེར་རྗེས་བརྗོད་བྲིས་ནས་ནི། །
མཁས་པའི་གཟུ་བོ་གཞན་ལ་བསྟནL (TIT 71} །
གལ་ཏེ་དཔང་པོ་རྩོད་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་མི་མཁས་པའི་བླུན་པོའམ།
ཤེས་ཀྱང་ཆགས་སྡང་གི་སྒོ་ ན ས་ཆེད་ཆེར་མི་འཛིན་པའམ། ངག་དྲང་པོར་
སྨྲ་བཞིན་དུ་སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་པའམ། ངག་གི་ཟུར་ཅུང་ཟད་བཅོས་ཏེ་སྒྲོ་
སྐུར་འདེབས་པའི་དཔང་པོ་དག་སྣང་ན་སྦྲུལ་གདུག་པའི་གནས་ སུ་ སྒྲོན་མ་་
འོད་མི་གསལ་བ་ལྟར་མཁས་པའི་རྩོད་པ་བསྔགས་པར་མི་འགྱུར་བས།
དཔང་པོ་དང་བཅས་པའི་གནས་དེར་ངག་ཡི་གེར་བཀོད་དེ། གཟུ་བོར་
གན ས་པའི་མཁས་པའི་ཚོགས་པ་གཞན་གྱི་གྲྭར་གླིང་བས་ མཁས་པའི་ཡོན་'
ཏན་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་རྟོགས་པར་འགྱུར་རོ། །ཚུལ་འདི་སྔོན་གྱི་མཁས་པ་
རྣ མས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ*ཡིན་ནོ།།
བདེ་གཤེགས་བསྟན་པ་སེང་གེའི་སྒྲ་བསྒྲགས་པས།།
ལོག་ལྟའི་རི་དྭགས་ཐམས་ ཅད་ཕམ་བྱས་ཏེ།
རྩོད་པ་མེད་པའི་གོ་འཕང་ལ་གནས་ནས།།
NEW R81'I'6'5'RE I5 K71 (III (2)
མཁས་པ་རྣམས་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ་ལས་ འབེལ་བའི་གཏམ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་་
སྟེ་ལེའུ་གསུམ་པའོ །| རྒྱུ ན ་
ཐུབ་པའི་བསྟན་པ་ཕྱོགས་སུ་འཕེལ་བ་དང༌།།
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་འདིར་ཡུན་རིང་གནས་བྱའི་ཕྱིར།།
མཁས་པའི་ལུགས་འཛིན་མཁས་པ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ།།
རྣམ་གསུམ་ཕྱེ་འདིར་མཁས་རྣམས་འཇུག་ པར་བྱུ། (IL 3)
155



299
༢ 995
162
སྙིགས་མའི་དུས་ཀྱི་སེམས་ ཅན་བསོད་ནམས་ཆུང་།
དེ་ཕྱིར་མཁས་པ་སློབ་པའི་སྐལ་བ་མེད། །
བདག་གིས་འབད་ཀྱང་གཞན་གྱིས་འཛིན་པ་བྱུང་།
དེས་ན་གཞན་ལ་ཕན་པའི་གོ་སྐབས་དཀའll (TIT 7 ）
ད་དུང་བདག་ལ་ལེགས་བཤད་ཡོད་མོད་ཀྱི།།
སྙིགས་མའི་དུས་ཀྱི་འགྲོ་བའི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་མིན།
མཁས་པ་འདོད་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ཉུང་བས་ན།།
བྱེད་པ་ཆུང་ཕྱིར་རྒྱུས་པར་འདིར་མ་སྤྲོས།[ (1II 75)
བསྟན་པའི་མཇུག་འདིར་བསྟན་ལ་རབ་གུས་ཤིང༌།།
བསྟན་པ་མཐའ་དག་བསྲུང་ཞིང་འཛིན་འདོད་པ།
ཤཱཀྱའི་དགེ་སློང་ ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དཔལ།།
བཟང་པོས་བསྟན་ལ་ཕན་ཕྱིར་འདི་སྦྱར་རོ།། (171 76 }
དེང་སང་ཤཱཀྱ་སེང་གེའི་བསྟན་པ་འདི།།
འབབ་ཆུ་ཟད་པའི་རྫིང་བཞི ན ་ཉིན་རེ་འབྲི།
བློ་གསལ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ཚུལ་འདི་ ལེགས་རྟོགས་ལ།།
ཐར་པ་འདོད་པ་དག་གིས་འབད་དགོས་སོ།། (IIL ༢༣）
བདག་གིས་བསྟན་པ་སྤེལ་ཕྱིར་འདི་བཀོད་ པའི།
མཁས་པ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ་ནི་རབ་ཕྱེ་བས།།
འགྲོ་ཀུན་ཐར་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐོར་ཞུགས་ཏེ།།
རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་བཅས་དགེས་པ་ ཐོབ་པར་ཤོག ། (LIT ?d)
བློ་གྲོས་གསལ་བའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་ཐར་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དུ་་་་་་
འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ་ དམ་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བགྲོད་པར་བྱ་བའི་འཇུག་ངོགས།
B2 34
20
156



299
7Q5y
རྩོམ་པ་དང་འཆད་པ་དང་རྩོད་པའི་ཚུལ་གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་པར་བྱེད་པ།
མཁས་པ་རྣམས་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་འདི་ནི་ཡུལ་བྱུང་་
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད། ༼ཁ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་ལྗོངས་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་གདན་
ལས་དཔག་ཚད་བརྒྱ་བགྲོད་པའི་གནས། འཇམ་པའི་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་
འོད་ཟེར་གྱིས་ཡིད་ཀྱི་མུན་པ་ཅུང་ཟད་བསལ་བར་བྱས་པས། ཤེས་བྱའི་
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ་ལ་བློའི་སྣང་བ་ཐོབ་པས་འཆད་པ་དང༌། རྩོམ་
པ་དང་། རྩོད་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་སྤོབས་པ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་ཤཱཀྱའི་ དགེ་སློང་ཀུན་
དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དཔལ་བཟང་པོས་སྦྱར་བ་འདི་རེ་ཤིག་ རྫོགས་སོ། II
་



IMPRESSUM
Verleger: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien
Maria Theresien-Straße 3/4/26, 1090 Wien, Austria
Herausgeber und für den Inhalt verantwortlich:
Prof. Ernst Steinkellner, Reisnerstraße 6, 1030 Wien
Druck:
Ernst Beevar Ges.m.b.H.,
Lichtgasse 10,
1150 Wien



STUDIEN ZUR TIBETOLOGIE UND BUDDHISMUSKUNDE
65,-
Prices in Austrian Schilling
1: Ernst Steinkellner, Verse-Index of Dharmakirti's Works
(Tibetan Versions). 1977. XIV, 225 p.
200.-
2: Lobsang Dargyay, Die Legende von den Sieben Prinzessinnen
(Saptakumārikā-Avadāna). In der poetischen Fassung von
Guhyadatta/Gopadatta aufgrund der tibetischen Übersetzung her-
ausgegeben, aber setzt und bearbeitet. 1978. X, 162 p.
200,-
3: Piotr Klafkowski, The Secret Deliverance of the Sixth Dalai
Lama, as narrated by Dharmatăla. Edited from the Hor Chos-
byun and translated into English, with an introduction and
comments. 1979. VI, 93 P.
200,-
4: Gudrun Bühnemann, Der Allwissende Buddha. Ein Beweis und
seine Probleme. Ratnakirti's Sarvajñasiddhi. 1980.
L, 175 P.
200,-
5: Helmut Tauscher, Candrakirti - Madhyamakāvatārab und Madhya-
makavatarabhasyam (Kapitel VI, Vers 166-226). 1981.
XXVII, 214 P.
200,-
6: Lobsang Dargyay, 11 99505428998446.4 4 ****
449 11- A Concise Biography of Gun than don
mchog bstan pa'i sgron me. 1981. VI, 45 p.
7: Ernst Steinkellner (Ed.), 11 9595578 ***97446844 888
9 944***849*49***45*4***.4'34' 11 Gun than
akon mchog bsTan pa'i sgron me'i rNam thar sgo gsum
gyi rnam bżag pa Legs bśad rgya mtsho'i rba rlabs.
1981. 20 p.
35,-
8: Gudrun Bühnemann, Jitāri: Kleine Texte. Description of a manu-
script from the Bihar Research Society with 10 small texts of
Jitāri, and the edition of the following texts in Sanskrit:
Vedāprāmapyasiddhi, Sarvariasiddhi, Nairatmyasiddhi, Jātinira-
krti, *Isvaravādimatapariksa. 1982, 1985. 48 p.
100,-
9: Josef Kolmaš, Ferdinand Stoliczka (1838-1874): The Life
and Work of the Czech Explorer in India and High
Asia. 1982. XI, 58 p.
80,-
10: E.Steinkellner/H. Tauscher (Ed.). Contributions on Tibetan
Language, History and Culture. Proceedings of the CSOMA
de Körös Symposium held at Velm-Vienna, Austria, 13-19 Septem-
ber 1981, vol.1. 1983. XX, 478 P.
560,-
11: E.Steinkellner/H. Tauscher (Ed.). Contributions on Tibetan
and Buddhist Religion and Philosophy. Proceedings of
the Csoma de Körös Symposium held at Velm-Vienna, Austria,
13-19 September 1981, vol.2. 1983. XII, 334 p.
270,-
12: Tilmann Vetter, Der Buddha und seine Lehre in Dharmakirtis
Pramanavārttika. Der Abschnitt über den Buddha und die
vier Ealen Wahrheiten im Pramanasidahi-Kapitel.
Eingeleitet, ediert und übersetzt. 1984. 183 p.
230,-



490,-
250,-
13: András Róna-Tas, Wiener Vorlesungen zur Sprach- und Kultur-
geschichte Tibets. 1985. 397p.
14: Michael Aris, Sources for the History of Bhutan. 1986. 203 p.
15: Ernst Steinkellner, Dharmottaras Paralokasiddhi. Nachweis
der Wiedergeburt, zugleich eine Widerlegung materialistischer
Thesen zur Natur der Geistigkeit. 1986. 57 p.
16: Per K. Sorensen, Candrakirti - Trisarapasaptati. The Septua-
gint on the Three Refuges. Edited, translated and annotated.
1986. 89 P.
80,-
120,-
